For the Planning Bill and Natural Environments Bill,
Horizons Regional Council is joining us.
They've had a few technical, issues.
Uh, so we're going to run a little bit behind, this
afternoon. So, Horizons, welcome to the Select
Committee. Just in the essence of time, because we, we
don't have a lot of time, we will, hand it over to you to,
talk us through your submission, and then see if we have any time for
questions.
Kia ora, and thank you very much, Catherine, and appreci- thank you for,
squeezing us in literally. We've had some difficulty.
I'm Nicky Riley. I'm the chair of Horizons Regional Council,
and I'm just going to hand over very quickly to,
Fiona, my deputy, who will talk us through,
some of the finer points of our submission.
But, some of the key things we've leaned into was
the regulatory relief, freshwater farm plans and, the
goals. There'll be some things around the goals that may be a little different from
other pe- other submissions. Uh, but at a very high level, I'd
also like to say that we are leaning in and supporting of
the, bill and principle and the changes of direction that the
government are taking us with this.
So without further ado, I'll introduce you to my deputy, Fiona
Gordon.
Kia ora. Thank you, and, apologies for the
technical, issues that we've had.
Um, look, I'm just going to focus some of our comments at
this point. Uh, we're taking our submission as read, of
course, and, we're looking at focusing today's
commentary around the opportunities to improve the bills.
Uh, we are recommending that the legislation provide certainty
about the priorities and outcomes for managing air, water, coast and
land within environmental limits,
that it recognizes and retains environmental quality where it is above
ecological health and human health limits.
That is to avoid the risk of managing down, resulting in a reduction of the
quality of our environment. We're seeking that the bills
identify the goals as overarching outcomes that set the direction
and outcomes to be reached through decision-making.
Um, that is that all decision-making should be subject to the
goals. Including additional goals
is on our list of recommendations, and that is to provide for the
protection of vulnerable and threatened species and to recognize
enhancement of the environment. We note that Section 4 of the purpose of the
act is to establish a framework for the use, protection, and
enhancement of the natural environment.
We include recommendations around transition, transitional arrangements
to address the misalignment between the development of limits through national
environment plans and the risk that regional spatial plans are developed on
assumptions that later may prove inconsistent with the environmental
capacity. We also recommend additional provisions to
ensure uncertainty or a lack of information does not lead to conservative
assessments that delay or dilute responses to
emerging environmental pressures.
For example, we recommend that the yet-to-be-determined environmental
limit setting methodology should include a built-in
margin to provide for uncertainty, errors,
limited data, and climate change impacts.
We recommend that the bills recognize existing treaty
settlements, but also include the values and interests of
iwi, hapū and Māori that do not have settled
legislation. We seek that it provides a
system of regulatory relief that is affordable and
proportionate. We are concerned about the legal risk and
affordability of the proposed regulatory relief in the absence
of other funding sources. We ask
for a reconsideration of the resource use levies as these
have potential to increase the revenue taken from our
community. I would like to take a moment to highlight the goals and
our comments on these. We submit that the relationship between the two pieces
of legislation and the goals needs to be clear.
This will set a transparent and consistent framework in place that
leads the decisions and planning instruments that follow.
The goals should be overarching provisions, and all decisions made
under the legislation should be subject to the goals, as noted
earlier. This would assist with implementation by ensuring the
intended outcomes are recognized in national
direction, the combined plan, and are
consistent through the hierarchy and are clear and
predictable.
In terms of additional goals
that we believe are needed in the Natural Environment Plan, sorry, the
Natural Environment Bill, we seek to retain environmental
quality where it is above ecological health and human health limits
to provide for the protection of vulnerable species, vulnerable and threatened
species. For example, further clarity is required
around the goal no net loss of biodiversity.
What does this mean? And we would query how this goal
alone would meet the purpose of the act regarding protection and
enhancement. We also note that we need to recognize
enhancement
further. With regards to enhancement, as
a council, we believe that providing for non-regulatory methods
within the planning framework would recognize the critical
mechanism-- would recognize non-regulatory methods as a
critical mechanism for achieving enhancement of our natural
resources. Horizons is concerned that the regulatory relief
requirement will divert funds away from our existing
non-regulatory initiatives. The combination of regulation where
necessary and providing incentives to landowners in the form
of non-regulatory methods have certainly proven to be a successful
combination for delivering on enhancement of the natural
environment. Thank you.
Look, thank you very much for, that submission.
Look, we'll go straight to Lan Pham for a
question.
Tena koutou. Thanks so much for your submission.
I wanted to pick up on, the aspects of
biodiversity, particularly that you've just been mentioning.
And wondering if you'd expand, 'cause you've sort of
suggested that we actually recognize, like
IUCN threatened species and that kinda thing.
Do you think that's especially important if, for example, the
Wildlife Act override or provision,
is actually retained in the bill when the protective purpose
of the Wildlife Act won't have any effect in these
bills?
Um, I'm happy to answer that question. I'm, Yvonne Lagarde.
I work for Horizons. So the Wildlife Act, there's no
suggestion that in the legislation that those two will
override each other. So the purpose is very different in the
Wildlife Act. It's absolute protection, but the purpose in the
Natural Environment Bill is, use, protection and
enhancement. So, it may not override
it. Um, currently, the Wildlife Act, it's, there's a
separation between the species and the habitats.
So, where the Wildlife Act may look after species, it doesn't necessarily
retain habitats, and where a habitat is at risk, then species are
also at risk.
Tha- thank you. Um, look, I had a question, because we had Hastings
District Council earlier, talking about highly productive land
here, because a lot of our land is one and two.
And I know that in the Horowhenua area and around Horizons,
there is also a lot of highly productive
land. Um, and they in their submission, thought that the
spatial framework may, you know, lessen the protection of
that land. I didn't see that in your submission,
and you haven't obviously raised it.
I'm just wondering, how you feel about that and
whether, you see any threat to your highly productive
land.
Um, once again, that depends on how the Regional Spatial Plan is drafted and
the detail available. So at the moment, the current
system with, with LUC one, two, and three, it
does capture more land. Um, the level
of protection that it's offered is prescribed in the national direction, and we
don't know what that will say when it comes out, if it's amended or not.
So if it's LUC one and two, the
amount of land may be different. But circling back to the
information, there are many soil scientists that are not completely
comfortable with the level of information, so the LiDAR
i- isn't available for our whole region, for example.
So there will be places that are missed based on the information we have
available and the science we have available.
Okay, thank you. Um, Priyanka has a question.
Thank you. Um, mine is on regulatory relief, and
you've stated in your written submission that you're supportive of it.
We have heard from other, councils who have told us
that this would be, would place some pretty significant
financial pressures on them, particularly
coupled with some of the other changes that the current government's making,
such as the rate cap. Did you... I just wanted to give you an
opportunity to expand on what you have in your written submission and,
test whether this is a concern for you as well or not.
Do you want to answer that one?
Um, I will, give a a short intro, in
terms of answering that, and then pass over to the team.
Um, look, we do recognize that, there are
significant pieces of work that our landowners, for example, carry out.
Um, there are significant, you know, sometimes there are
significant, restrictions placed on landowners in terms of what they can
and can't do on their property because of various rules.
And, in certain cases, those will be for, you know, they're, they're about
public good. And so we see regulatory relief as being an
opportunity to reflect that. Um, but also we've made that comment
around, yeah, the rates capping, and the issues that it, it might impinge on
our ability to put funding towards those non-regulatory methods
that are focused more on enhancing, the environment.
And I'll, I'll pass over to the team for additional
comment.
Yeah, I don't really have anything to add there.
That, regulatory relief is one of a number of tools,
but it does seem to,
remove the opportunity under a rates capping environment from,
from the non-regulatory tools. So it, it's about really
what the policy settings are.
Look, thank you very much. It appears we have no further questions.
Um, thank you for your submission today.
Um, of course we have it, written there and we've, read it,
so thank you for that as well. Um, and yeah, we,
appreciate the technical difficulties, that you had,
so, you're not the only one. So thank you.
Thanks, Catherine. Thanks for making time and space for us today.
And just one final comment on the HPL.
Um, we do, value our highly productive land in class one and
two, and anything you can do to assist us with the situation in
Horowhenua would be greatly appreciated.
Yeah. No, thank you.
Right. We now move on to our next submitter, Te Kura
Takapini, who are there right in
front of us. Uh, welcome to the Select Committee.
Is it Gabrielle and Jess? Brilliant.
Look, you've got 15 minutes with us, so, we'll hand it over to you in the
essence of time to talk us through your submission, and then we'll open for some
questions.
Thank you. Um, my name's Gabrielle Huria, and I'm the Chief Executive
of Te Kura Takapini, the Ngāi Tahu Freshwater Group.
I also come from an old Ngāi Tahu fishing family
that practices the old ways of how we catch and
process our food source from the freshwater ways
of the South Island. Last week, the committee heard the broader Ngāi Tahu
submission. Today, we are s- focusing specifically on
freshwater. We made a separate freshwater s- submission
because the challenges facing freshwater in our takiwā are
significant, and the Natural Environment Bill will have major
implications for how those systems are managed in the
future. Today, we want to briefly highlight what we are
seeing on the ground in Te Waipounamu and
why getting this legislation right matters.
Two-thirds of New Zealand's surface water and seventy percent of its
groundwater are within our tribal territory.
What happens in the South Island shapes the national
outcome. But the system is under enormous
strain. Across our tribal territory, we see
over-allocation, contamination, ecosystem
modification, declining biodiversity, and drinking
water risks for our rural communities relying on private
wells. As an example, we have most of our marae
in rural areas. We have four marae currently that
have nitrates in their drinking water over the world
health standards. So it's not just us.
We test our wells regularly. It's all the private wells in the rural
areas in our takiwā. There's so many of them that have
nitrates over the world health standards that the people don't
realize. These pressures exist from the mountains to the
sea, and the status quo is not
sustainable. So as another example, Lake
Ellesmere or Te Waihora is one of the most polluted lakes in New
Zealand. We own the lake bed
of that lake, and so it has become a
giant filthy drain for all of Canterbury.
Recently, we tested the water in the lake, and it
was-- the, the air coming off the lake was
twenty-six times over the world health
standards. So that means if you go near the lake and you've
got asthma or you're elderly or you're a young child,
for health and safety purposes, you have to wear a face mask and
goggles so you don't breathe in the cyanobacteria.
So from our perspective, living like that along the lake, I used to gather
all of our eels and flounder from that lake.
I haven't done that for over a decade because it's too
dirty. It means we've entered Mad Max territory, where you
go out into the environment and you're wearing face mask and goggles not to be
poisoned by the environment. So I'll
s- I'll, I'll turn to Jess Riddell, who will speak further on the
issues.
So today we want to just highlight four key points from our
submission. The first one is around Māori freshwater rights and
interests.
From the Ngāi Tahu perspective, the Crown has repeatedly failed to honor its
commitments when it comes to Māori freshwater rights and interests,
and that failure is what led Ngāi Tahu to taking legal action against the
Crown on this, and we're currently still awaiting that judgment.
The issues remain unresolved, which is why we think that preservation clause in the
Natural Environment Bill is necessary.
But preservation is not progress.
And what we're asking for is that the Crown engage directly with Ngāi Tahu as a
priority. The Ngāi Tahu settlement, the active
litigation, and the scale of the freshwater challenges in this takiwā
mean that these issues cannot be simply deferred into a generic national
process. To be clear, the Ngāi Tahu litigation isn't
about water ownership or about a percentage allocation.
Ngāi Tahu are not seeking a share of the water, particularly in
over-allocated catchments where there is nothing left to
divide. Litigation is not the tribe's
objective. System redesign is.
Ngāi Tahu is already working with leading international researchers on
AI-enabled modeling, advanced monitoring tools, and improved
governance design. But the regulatory frameworks
are currently designed for last century and are constraining
innovation for the next. So if you want to see reform that
endures, this relationship between the Crown and Ngāi Tahu needs to
move beyond consultation and into genuine
co-design. The second point I want to touch on
is environmental limits. This is an area where co-design
is particularly important. Ngāi Tahu
supports strong binding limits that are
evidence-based, enforceable, robustly
monitored, and responsive to the evolving
science. The current NPS-FM bottom lines
are a practical starting point. However, we want to see in the
legislation a role for Ngāi Tahu which is
influential in setting limits at a national and regional
levels. We want those limits to be hard lines,
not aspirational targets. Cost and economic
considerations cannot be used to dilute those
ecological bottom lines. And Ngāi Tahu do not
support broad exceptions for significant infrastructure or
public benefit. If there are to be exceptions, these need
to be incredibly rare, tightly constrained, and
demonstra- demonstrably improve the environmental
outcomes. If limits are breached,
urgent and enforceable action must follow, including the
ability to review and adjust existing consents.
Without enforceable limits, reform will not restore ecological
health nor the public confidence.
Another brief example is the Manuherekea River in Central
Otago. It's currently over-allocated by eight times the
regional plan's take limit. By the time the river
joins another important waterway for us, the Matau, it has
been reduced to a trickle compared to its strong upper
reaches. Such low flows create serious ecological
risks, high water temperatures, loss of habitat for fish and
birds, higher nutrient concentrations, sediment build-up,
increased toxic... in-increased ri-risk of toxic
algal blooms. Ensuring appropriate environmental
limits, particularly minimum flow levels, is crucial for
the health of the Manuherekea and its mahinga kai.
And that's pretty much the same situation up the eastern
seaboard of Te Waipounamu.
The third point we really want to highlight today is around
policy implementation through digital solutions.
We know that resource management decisions are only as strong as the information
that sits behind them. But currently, the monitoring and consenting
systems are fragmented, inconsistent, and often still
manual. And these paper-based processes are, and
disconnected data sets are slowing consenting down,
weakening compliance, and undermining confidence in
decision-making. The 10-year review cycles,
that are for, regional plans are just too blunt for
a dynamic environmental system. And our
sub-submission proposes a shift towards real-time
monitoring, integrated visibility of consents,
particularly around, discharges and
allocation, scenario modeling and forecasting
tools, and clear triggers for adaptive
management. When we have transparent and accessible
information, that's what builds legitimacy.
Now, communities, iwi developers, and the regulators all
need this visibility to ensure there are clear
decision-making a-and visibility of what the trade-offs
are. And when that data is integrated and
visible, the trust and public confidence increases
too. This is particularly important as when,
the reform has a significant shift towards a more
permissive regime, so that's when monitoring and enforcement
become the frontline safeguard. If we're going to have more
permitted activities, that compliance becomes that environmental
backstop, and that backstop depends entirely
on strong data systems.
But investment in those data systems should not be seen as a cost.
It's risk mitigation infrastructure.
When we have poor data, we make poor decisions, and those
poor decisions are incredibly expensive to fix.
So if we wanna see durable reform, digital governance and s-
infrastructure must be embedded from the
outset. The last point we'd like to highlight
today is around resource levies.
Freshwater has long been treated as free and limitless,
and that's enabled some private game, gain while pushing the
contamination and restoration costs onto the communities and in
particular iwi. In effect, the public is
subsidizing polluters. And w- if we're
serious about enforceable limits, real-time monitoring, and
adaptive management, we must also be serious about how that system is
funded. That's why Ngāi Tahu supports a natural resource
levy system which will address over-allocation and
contamination, incentivize efficient and
high-value water use,
and also that money can be channeled into monitoring,
enforcement, and restoration. And we particularly support
if levies are ca- are collected in a particular catchment, that
money is sp- tagged for restoration and funding
into that same catchment so that the community can really see the
benefits of those levies.
The choice before this committee is to think about freshwater
reform will define New Zealand's environmental
credibility and economic resilience for generations.
It's not hydro or dairy or farming that are the
backbone of the New Zealand economy, it's fresh water.
The question is not whether change will occur, it is whether change will be
shaped deliberately or imposed by ecological
failure. Ngāi Tahu is not here simply to
critique. We want to partner in the decision, design, and
delivery of a system that integrates
rights for everyone clearly, enforceable limits,
modern data infrastructure, and economic
discipline. We want to help build a freshwater
system our grandchildren can inherit with
confidence, not one they are forced to
repair. We welcome your questions. Ngā mihi.
Thank you very much for that submission.
A lot in there and appreciate your time on it.
Uh, look, we'll go to a question from Lan Pham.
E nga koroa, thank you so much for your very comprehensive
submission, and there's so much to get into with it.
But I wanted to start with this first question, and that was
around, your request
that the committee actually includes an express
ability to review and adjust conditions of existing
permits in a catchment where limits are reached or
exceeded. And I note that later in your submission you give
the example of Ōtūwharekai, and I'm
interested in sort of what the c-committee might be able to learn from
that experience, and then how you
view
The parts of the bill that
basically say councils have to be satisfied that voluntary
measures will not meet the environmental limits before they
can take a regulatory approach.
Keen on any thoughts there.
No, thanks. Thank you for the question, Lan.
I think, Otawhirikai is an incredibly interesting example
because what the situation there is that
all the farmers in that catchment are actually doing
everything within their consent and within the planning limits,
yet there's an in-- there's an incredibly,
um... We've seen a deterioration in the water
quality there. So we are seeing a
situation where everything is legal and above board, but yet we're
not achieving the desired environmental outcomes.
So there's something wrong in that system there.
And even though, the farmers are doing a great efforts when it comes to
farm planning and achieving A grades and doing all they
can, but it's not working enough. So that's when
we need to have, tools there in the kitty to be able
to adjust consents, adjust the planning rules,
not wait for a plan change or a ten-year planning review or
the end of a thirty-five-year consent.
The environment simply does not have time to
wait for these arbitrary processes that we've put in
place in legislation in a planning world.
That's why we're asking for a system that is more
dynamic and can a-- we have clear triggers set out that
when we hit this point, we're not seeing the outcomes we want, then we
need to do something different.
Look, thank you very much. Look, we have met time.
Uh, we appreciate your time today, but we are gonna have to wrap it up there.
But, yeah, a great submission. So thank you very much.
Thank you. Thank you. Ka kite.
So we now move to our next submitter, which is Chorus
New Zealand.
Good afternoon, Andrew. We can see you there.
Welcome to the Select Committee this afternoon.
Look, we will hand it over to you to talk us through your submission, and then
we'll open up the questions. Thank you.
Okay. Good afternoon, and, thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
I'm Andrew Cantor, the Environmental Planning Manager here at Chorus, New
Zealand's largest telecommunications infrastructure provider.
Our network supports more than one point one million broadband connections and is
embedded in every region, district, and territorial jurisdiction in the
country. Because we operate everywhere, we are acutely aware
of how a fragmented and inconsistent planning system can slow down
infrastructure delivery, increase costs, and create uncertainty
for both providers and communities.
For these reasons, Chorus strongly supports the intent of the reform, particularly
the shift toward greater national consistency,
and a system that is clearer, more predictable, and more enabling for essential
infrastructure. Telecommunications are now
essential infrastructure. Every bit as critical as electricity, water, and
transport. Our network underpins economic growth, education,
social connection, healthcare, and community resilience.
We saw this vividly during COVID-19.
When New Zealand shut down physically, it stayed open
digital-digitally. Fiber kept households connected, kept
businesses operating, and is still just as essential today in maintaining
connectivity, for example, holding Select Committee hearings via
Zoom. So as New Zealand embarks on major reform of its
resource management system, it's crucial that telecommunications infrastructure,
particularly fiber, is recognized, enabled, and planned for in a
clear and consistent way across the country.
Our written submission covered a wide range of issues from the interaction between
the two bills, the management of effects, emergency works, and
designations. At a high level, our position is that reforms are heading
in the right direction. They present a real opportunity for a more enabling
and consistent system. And with targeted refinements, they can be
made clearer, more efficient, and more supportive of essential infrastructure.
Today, I'll focus on four key points that are particularly important to Chorus
and to New Zealand's digital connectivity.
The first is in regard to the new permitted activity registration system.
Chorus undertakes more than five thousand permitted activities a year.
Straightforward, low impact work like customer connections and routine
maintenance, predominantly controlled under the National Environmental Standard
for Telecommunications Facilities.
The bills w-would require these activities to be registered, assessed, and
monitored by councils. That alone could create thousands of minor
administrative processes annually without providing any corresponding
environmental benefit. For inf-infrastructure providers and for
councils, this would introduce cost, delay, and uncertainty where none
currently exists. Our request is simple, to remove the
registration requirement altogether, or at a minimum, exclude activities
permitted by national standards or those undertaken by critical
infrastructure providers.
The second p-point we would like to focus on is in regard to infrastructure
goals. Under the new system, statutory goals guide every
planning and consenting decision.
That means the wording of the infrastructure goal is
vital. Planning Bill-- In the Planning Bill, infrastructure
goal is drafted more weakly than others.
It asks for decision makers to plan and provide for infrastructure, while other
goals require them to protect, ensure, support, or
enable. That creates an unnecessary risk that infrastructure gets
deprioritized in the balancing exercise.
In the National Environment Bill, there is no infrastructure goal at all, despite
the NEB shaping national instruments and consenting pathways.
To avoid inconsistent outcomes and provide for integrated management, we need
stronger, clearer goals. We recommend strengthening the Planning Bill, so it
requires decision makers to protect, enable, and support
infrastructure.Recognising public benefit and operational constraints
and inserting an equivalent infrastructure goal into the National Environment Bill.
Third point I'd like to focus on is the development of national
instruments. National instruments will shape the entire system, and they need
to work effectively. At present, the time frames are short,
there's no provision for hearings or involvement of key stakeholders, and
without safeguards, new national standards could inadvertently
backslide from the recently reviewed and updated national standards,
such as the National Environmental Standard for Telecommunications Facilities.
Given how central these are to the new system, we recommend
ensuring national standards are no less enabling than existing RMA
national direction,
extending development time frames from nine to twelve months, and
enabling key stakeholder engagement and hearings during their development.
This is essential to ensure good, durable national rules for
infrastructure. The final point I'd like to focus on
is the need to establish a national standard for telecommunications
servicing in new developments. This is Chorus's highest
priority. New Zealand has invested heavily in world-class open
access fibre networks. Yet despite that, a growing number of new
subdivisions are being built without any fibre at all, or with
private closed fibre systems that lock residents into a single
provider. Our experience is that these cases are
increasing, particularly in areas where district plans are outdated
and lack clear requirements for telecommunications servicing.
Many subdivision rules haven't been updated in a decade or more, meaning
developers can omit fibre entirely or install proprietary networks
without consumers understanding the implications.
The impacts are significant. Homeowners assume fibre will be
available, only to discover after purchase that it isn't, or that
retrofitting require, will require disruptive, expensive civil works across
multiple properties. Where private networks are installed, people are
locked into limited provider choice, sometimes just a single retailer
with restricted plans and often lower performance.
These decisions undermine digital equity, reduce
competition, and erode the public investment made through the UFB
programme. The upcoming reforms provide a once in a generation
opportunity to fix this. We already require water, power, and
roading infrastructure in subdivisions.
It is entirely appropriate to expect modern digital infrastructure to be treated
the same way. Internationally, this is standard practice.
For example, Australia requires developers to install modern fibre-ready
infrastructure in new developments, ensuring consumer choice and competition
from day one. Our recommendation is clear: new national
standards should establish a default requirement for open access fibre in all
new residential and commercial developments where it is reasonably
practicable. These, this requirement should apply consistently
nationwide, allow flexibility where fibre genuinely cannot be
installed, and define open access in line with the
Telecommunications Act to ensure networks are wholesale, neutral,
and support full retail competition.
This single change would prevent digital inequity in new communities,
ensure that public investment in UFB is not undermined by fragmented
private networks, give developers clarity and certainty, and
future-proof New Zealand's digital infrastructure for decades to come.
For Chorus, this is the most important issue before the committee today.
To close, Chorus strongly supports the intent of these reforms.
They can create a clearer, more enabling, and more consistent system that
recognises the essential nature of infrastructure and supports New Zealand's
long-term wellbeing and economic growth.
The targeted amendments we've outlined, particularly the establishment of a
national open access fibre requirement, the bills can ensure every new community is
built with the digital foundations it needs to thrive.
Thank you for your time. Happy to take questions.
Look, thank you, Andrew. Uh, some really interesting points that you've made there
in the submission. Uh, look, I'll go to Ryan Hamilton for a question
first.
Thanks. Um, just picking up your point around emergency,
provisions. Uh, obviously extending from thirty
days to sixty days makes sense. I was just trying to wrap my h-head around the
seven to fourteen days.
Um, how does that work? 'Cause y-obviously you wanted, to, to
provide emergency notification, I thought you'd want less days, but I've probably
got that round back to front.
Um,
would that be... Sorry, I'm just trying to get to that page.
It's on, page seventeen of your submission.
Um, just written emergency
works.
Uh, so that would enable us to have more time to allow
to, to notify the consenting authority, being the
council-
Yeah
... typically, that those works have taken place, is my understanding.
Yeah. So it's pretty straightforward.
It's just a bit compressed when you're obviously under a lot of pressure in those
environments.
That's correct. And, and pulling those applications together or those
notifications together requires a lot of sort of technical input, and
those people are sort of entirely consumed in getting the network up
and running in those situations.
Yeah. Yeah. Sure. Thank you.
Um, look, I just wanna ask a quick question because, you t-said that
your main priority was to create the national standard for open
access fibre. Um, and you talked about some other
jurisdictions, you mentioned Australia.
But, a-are you seeing this as quite broad practice
across, other international jurisdictions around the
world? I mean, you've just used Australia as an example, but is that, is that
common practice?
Sure. So Australia, as I mentioned, they've got a, a sort of national policy on
telecommunications and new developments.
Uh, in the UK and parts of Europe, they have
similar requirements. They might be technology agnostic, but
require a minimum sort of speed. I think they call it gigabit
ready. Um, so that could sort of
allow, I assume, alternative types of technology, although
The benefit of fibre is once it's in the ground, it's sort of that ongoing
scalability and performance upgrades are very quick and simple.
You just tweak the electronics at either end.
Yeah. And obviously this is from the national direction point of view-
Yeah
... like creating the national standard.
But, like, how you-- the, I can't see here that you've, you've,
you've just kind of talked about it, but what, what, what would that actually look
like-
Uh, I guess-
... from your point of view?
... with the, w-with these national instruments being
created, we would have one similar to that Australian policy o-on
telecommunications and new developments.
The, I guess, the issue we're trying to resolve is currently it comes under the
subdivision provisions of each district plan.
Oh, yeah.
Typically, the s- each subdivision will be sort of a controlled
activity subject to meeting certain standards, and one of those standards will
be, in the newer updated district plans will be, you know, must
put in fibre. Uh, some of the older outdated district
plans will either just simply state telecommunications or it's
not, will stay silent on telecommunications altogether, therefore
allowing those developments to occur without putting it in.
And that's what we need.
Okay, so if that wasn't, say a national direction, is that your, is that
your fear that obviously it's just determined by district plans and there's
inconsistency across, plans?
That's correct, and we're having to sort of front up at every district plan hearing
around the country at the moment to sort of get these updated and
amended.
Okay. Yeah. No, that explains it. Thank you. Thank, thank you very much, Andrew.
Uh, we have met time. Uh, we appreciate your time,
and, you know, coming in from that perspective, is, is very helpful for us.
So thank you.
Thank you.
So we now move to, our next submitter, the Mackenzie
District
Council.
And there we can see the Mackenzie District Council.
Welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
Um, look, we have your submission, take it as read, but we'll hand over to you
to talk us through any points you'd like to highlight, and then we'll open up for
questions.
Yeah. Good day. Thanks for that. Scott Aaronson, the Mayor of the Mackenzie
District. I've got my CEO, Angela, on my right
here, and I have my two senior planners here with me as well.
So I'll do a little bit of speaking, and then, I'll probably let Angela speak
a little bit. Um, if you've got any questions, just let us know.
Um, just a heads up to you guys, this is the first time I've sat in front of a
select committee, and I'm pretty blunt, so, you'll just have to,
take that on board. Um, but anyway, look, one of our biggest
issues with the way this is going with this bill is
the regulatory relief. Now, obviously, there's been quite a
bit of feedback on that already. Um, but from our
perspective, obviously Mackenzie Basin, Mackenzie District,
we're talking a large geographical area w-with a very small ratepayer base.
Uh, we've got a population of about five and a half thousand people.
Um, I can appreciate that, National are
wanting to move this through and, looking for an easing of the
RMA as it currently stands. But, when it comes
to giving relief to our ratepayers in the form of
compensation, we're just not in a position to be able to,
to realize that. Um,
we probably, if we were gonna proceed down that track, we'd need to look at some
practical solutions or some practical workarounds around
that as opposed to, a financial relief if, if
that's what was being asked for. Um, the other side of the
coin is we're also looking at a
Dark Sky Reserve. Um, that's, that's a really important part of our,
of our basin, and, we want to,
maintain that Dark Sky Reserve status.
So, we're very conscious that, if, if we have
development that's rampant, that'll certainly put that at risk.
So there's, there's a couple of, important things there sitting right at
the top of our list, but I'll let Angela speak to it a little bit more.
Um, kia ora. Um, my name is Angela Istaz.
I'm the Chief Executive of the Mackenzie District Council.
Um, as our mayor has highlighted, our district is one of New Zealand's smallest
by population, but one of the largest by land area.
We have over seven thousand one hundred and thirty-nine square kilometers,
and the decisions that are made within these bills will fundamentally shape our
environment and our communities for decades to come.
Today, I'm going to highlight the two areas that our mayor has
mentioned, which is particularly around the regulatory relief
re-regime and the removal of amenity related controls and
uncertainty regarding the outdoor lighting provisions that are vital
to the Aoraki Mackenzie International Dark Sky.
Um, we believe that the regulatory relief, it could potentially be
a disproportionate and an unfunded burden for our
ratepayers. Uh, we support the intent behind the resource
management reform, but the rele-regulatory relief framework as
currently drafted places councils, and particularly small
rural councils like the Mackenzie, in a very untenable
position. Um, this is going to be even more so
when we start to find ourselves living within the ra- the
environment of rates capping. Um, we are required by
law to protect outstanding natural landscapes, historic
heritage, and sites of significance to Maori.
These duties mirror longstanding Section Six obligations and
remain unchanged in the new system, yet the bills also
propose that when we meet those obligations, councils may now have
to compensate landowners if the rules are a significant impact
on reasonable use, use, both undefined and highly
subjective terms.This effectively means that our
councils, and ultimately our ratepayers, must pay for following the
law. Um, the Mackenzie Basin, is an area of
national and international significance.
Um, this could create a large and unpredictable financial liability for a
very small ratepayer base. The same would apply
in other areas and other lightscane- outstanding natural landscapes
like Queenstown and in Oamaru.
Um, these are places valued by all New Zealands- New
Zealanders, yet only local ratepayers would shoulder the financial
burden. Um, the, the, the, the, the place-- the
impact that we have on the New Zealand Inc economy in terms of
GDP should be borne in mind, because the value of the Mackenzie Basin is
greater than just the Mackenzie District.
We would strongly urge the committee to re-target the regulatory
re-relief regime. Relief should only apply when councils
go beyond the national direction, and not when they are simply fulfilling mandatory
obligations. We also urge that the relief apply
prospectively only. In the Mackenzie Basin, protections
have been in place for nearly twenty years.
It is neither fair nor feasible for long-standing plan provisions
to now create compensation liabilities under a new
regime. Sorry.
No.
Um, so just moving on. In terms of the clearer drafting of this
framework, we th- we believe that some of the terms are very ambiguous, such
as reasonable and significant. Without clear definitions, these terms will
inevitably lead to litigation cost and delay.
Another cost for our council and our ratepayers.
We ask the committee to consider redefining or reframing these concepts in
the primary re-legislation, so that councils can implement the new
sy-system with certainty and without exposing our ratepayers to
unnecessary risk.
Um, outdoor lighting and the Aoraki Mackenzie International Dark Sky
Reserve. Another area of concern is the, is uncertainty about whether
the outdoor lighting controls will be considered amenity provisions, and
therefore potentially out of scope for land use plans.
In most planning documents, outdoor lighting rules do more than manually-- more
than manage visual amenity. They support road safety, protect wildlife,
and in our district they are absolutely essential to maintaining the
Aoraki Mackenzie International Dark Sk- Dark Sky
Reserve, the largest gold tier reserve in the s- in the, in the
world. Dark sky tourism is central to our regional economy.
The government's own tourism growth map emphasizes the Dark Sky
Reserve as a national tourism asset.
Removing or weakening our ability to manage lighting would directly undermine
both local wellbeing and national economic
strategies. A system that risks
losing the lo- the rural voice. We support greater national
consistency and standardization, but it must not come at the expense of our
rural communities. The planning challenges in Fairlie and
Tekapo are not the same in large metropolitan
areas. Provisions around zoning, density, and bespoke
rules must re-retain enough flexibility for councils to reflect
local context, particularly in areas
facing risks such as wilding pines, wildfire hazards, or
river sensitivity.
Our message is simple: we want the reform to succeed.
But for it to succeed, it must not unintentionally shift
disproportionate and unfunded burdens onto small ratepayer
communities. We ask the committee to ensure that the legislation
targets regulatory relief where it is truly justified,
clarifies terms to avoid future litigation, and protects local
ability to manage outdoor lighting, and preserves the voice and the needs of
small rural districts. Thank you for the opportunity to present
today. We're happy to take any questions.
Look, thank you very much. And thank you, you know, for putting the light
and perspective on the Mackenzie country area.
Uh, we appreciate that, 'cause obviously every area across the country is quite
different. Uh, so look, we have got a couple of questions.
So we'll open up to Priyanka first.
Thank you, for both your submissions.
Quick question on the points you've made around regulatory
relief. I think you've been very clear in your written submission that the position
it would put your, council in is
untenable. Would you be able to share
some, I guess some, some concerns, some
tangible examples of what the implications would be
if this legislation were to pass with no change
to that aspect, of the leg?
It's very difficult to quantify because there's no guidelines around what the
regulatory relief would actually, um-- what-- how it would be
applied. So very difficult to quantify what that impact would
be. But I can tell you the effects of tourism on our small ratepayer
base. And, I believe that the, you know, we,
we... Cleaning our toilets just, you know, three times a day
costs our ratepayers over eight hundred thousand.
Now imagine if we've got to add to that burden and actually add
compensation on top of that. It places a very
unequitable burden on a very small ratepayer
base.
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, now we'll move to Lan for a question.
Tena koutou. Thank you so much for an excellent
submission. And I wanted to ask, really it's a
question of clarification, because you talk about,
agriculture and tourism being such,
underpinning, I guess the two underpinning industries of the
Mackenzie Basin. And you talked about some figures
from
last year which showed tourism expenditure was three hundred and
nineteen million
in the Mackenzie District, and provisional GDP of,
five hundred and thirty million.
Do you h- Are you aware of similar figures about-
Agriculture and its contribution to the Mackenzie's
economy?
Um, I'm sure there are plenty of stats a-available and in terms of what the
agricultural contribution are to GDP.
But I think, you know, just going back to the point around the regulatory
relief and, and the impacts that that has,
while those are significant contributors to the economy,
and to the people that run operations here, what doesn't
translate is those economic benefits from tourism don't
generate to the council. So the costs of tourism and the costs of
all of those unfunded mandates, like regulatory relief,
would actually fall to our rate payers, and I guess that's the point we're making.
Um, so happy to provide other details around agri-agriculture, and I'm
sure we can provide that. Don't have that on hand at the
moment.
Thank you.
Thank, thank you. Um, look, I just want to jump in with a question around greater
standardization because that's something that you've said you support in your
submission, but then you raise some concerns around,
you know, smaller towns, and them being
quite different in terms of well-functioning urban
areas. Um, and you've said you w-want us
to see balancing standardization with the different requirements between
vastly different settlement sizes across the country.
Just wondering if you could just elaborate a little bit more on, on, on what's
unique to, your area and, and why you pointed that
out.
I might ask my planning manager, Julie Shames, to talk
about that, but I would point, point to the Tekapo
community, and, point to some of the,
the unique iconic landscapes that are around there.
We have very unique guideline designs in terms of color
palettes and various other aspects, but I'll ask our planners to talk to the detail
of that, because that really does go to creating,
the, the environment that, that is so attractive for the
tourism.
Um, so the point we were trying to make in our submission with that was
a lot of councils have seen the benefit of the national planning standards and the
standardization across zones and those district wide matter chapters
such as signs or temporary activities, earthworks.
Um, and so there are a lot of similarities probably in the second generation
district plans out there. We have a medium density zone, but
Christchurch also probably has a medium density zone, and what those zones provide
for in a big city compared to our townships is quite different.
So we don't want the thinking to be that a medium density
zone works for everybody, because there is going to be nuance within
that.
Okay. No, thank you. Thank you for that.
Um, look, thank you for your time today and,
for your submission, and your insights into the
Mackenzie District, so we appreciate it. Thank you.
Thank you.
And we do like blunt as well, Scott, so there you go .
You, you only just got a small portion of it, sorry.
No, all good. Thank you.
Thanks.
So we will now move through, to the next
submitter, Waitaki District Council.
I think we've got a few joining us.
Hello.
Hello. We've got Sven and Victoria.
Uh, welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
Uh, we'll hand it over to you to talk us through your submission, and then we'll
open for questions. Thank you.
Great. Thank you, and thank you for the opportunity to speak to our
submission. Um, I'd like to cover three topics that we're
concerned about. Um, the first one is the timing and sequencing.
So the Waitaki District Council supports the resource management
reform in principle, but is concerned that the pace and,
and currency of multiple simultaneous reforms,
it creates significant implementation risk.
Um, the time frames for the regional spatial plans and the combined district
plans are extremely tight. Um, there's a real risk of rushed
plans,
that are poorly integrated with the local needs.
Um, by way of example of some of the impacts we face, we
straddle two
regional councils. We've got Canterbury and Otago.
So, we've got a significant increase in work by both
offices and, elected members.
Um, the timing of each regional plan will influence the
notification of our land use plan,
which then has a flow on effect to the implementation of the combined regional
plan.
Um, so it's all very tight. And the preparing council's next long-term
plan under proposed rate caps, changing local government form,
and system proposals, while simultaneously
transitioning, to a new planning framework creates direct
tension. Um, so accurate financial planning
is extremely difficult when, the regulatory environment
and cost implications are still being determined.
Um, secondly, the regulatory relief,
and I note that the Waitaki District Council's elected
members, take a s- different position in part from the
council officers and some sector bodies, regarding
regulatory relief. And I'd like to emphasize that
our, support for regulatory relief is deliberate in
principle. Um, elected members in Waitaki
support regulatory relief framework, and particularly the
principle that where regulation delivers a public good
and materially affects reasonable use of private
land, there should be public accountability for that
cost. And this is not about weakening
environmental or heritage protections, it's about introducing
cost discipline and transparency into regulatory,
decision-making.Currently, councils can
and are required to impose overlays and restrictions with no direct
fiscal consequence, leaving the landowner to
hire their own experts to counter the proposal to
avoid the ensuing restrictions, increased consent
burden, and potential reduction in land value.
Um, through our district plan review, there are numerous examples
of this playing out, so there are real private costs
to the public overlays.
Um, to balance the situation, regulatory relief, would introduce a visible
cost, a budgeting discipline, and stronger scrutiny of
whether protection is genuinely justified.
Regulatory relief encourages better quality
regulation. If councils must account financially
for regulatory impacts, then overlays will need to be well
evidenced, significance thresholds will need to be more robust,
and decision-making will be more defensible.
It strengthens, not weakens, the legit- legitimacy of the
protections, because the true price is
baked into the system to the level that the public is willing to pay the
cost of, and the landowners have more incentive then to truly
support the system.
So where the public benefits, it's reasonable that the public covers the cost, and
Waitaki already uses complementary models.
We already operate a heritage fund, a biodiversity
fund, we've consent fee waivers for works
on heritage items that maintain or enhance protected
values. And while these funds are contestable, they
go a small way to cover the cost,
which are imposed, and they demonstrate
that relief mechanisms can work,
and, they don't automatically have to create unsustainable fiscal
burdens. A national framework with further
relief options would complement these existing tools.
So we support flexibility in relief tools, with
monetary option as a payment, rates relief, consent fee
waivers, access to targeted grants.
Um,
and elected members do consider the monetary relief appropriate because it
provides a transparency and makes it visible in council
budgets. Um, it reinforces that regulation has
real economic impacts. Uh, it ensures
the incentives align with the interests of the
environment. Um, for
example, landowners are currently disincentivized to
plant native species because it might become a significant natural area.
So we acknowledge that others have expressed concerns, however, we believe the risk
lies not in the relief itself, but in poor
design or unclear drafting, and we think the answer is refinement,
not removal. Um, planning reform seeks better
balance between environmental protection and development.
Regulatory relief, reinforces that balance by making the trade-offs
explicit.
Uh, it avoids hidden cross subsidies and strengthens
democratic accountability. So Waitaki District Council
supports the regulatory relief framework and principle with clearer definitions,
better drafting, and appropriate funding tools.
Uh, it can improve regulatory quality,
enhance legitimacy of protections, and deliver fairer outcomes,
both communities and landowners.
And then, lastly, our third concern was retail distribution
effects. Um, because town centers are the heart
of smaller communities, like ours.
They're not just the economic hub, they're where local identity
lives. Uh, when out-of-town retail is allowed to grow
unchecked, that identity is put at risk.
The impacts are real. The jobs shift away from the town centers, car
dependency increases, and residents who don't have access to
reliable... Uh, sorry, reliable access to a vehicle lose out the
most. Um, out-of-town developments
can't replicate what a traditional town center,
offers. The mix of shops, the services, and
community spaces that give places
character, and give residents genuine
choice. For smaller communities like Oamaru,
these effects hit harder. We don't have the scale,
or resilience to absorb them the way larger cities can.
Uh, the planning system currently gives councils like ours the tools
to manage these impacts, specifically the ability to
consider retail distribution effects.
Removing that ability would leave smaller councils without meaningful
protection. So we urge the committee to retain this tool
and to recognize that a one size fits all approach disadvantages
smaller communities. Uh, Waitaki's
NPS for urban development report showed a
decrease in vacant shops in Oamaru CBD
compared to twenty twenty-four.
We believe that careful management of big box retail has contributed to
that result, and we'd like to maintain it.
So, would, welcome any
questions.
Look, thank you, Sven. Uh, appreciate, your
submission, and a lot of work's gone into this, so appreciate that.
Uh, look, we'll move to Cameron Luxton
first for a question.
Yes. Uh, thank you, Chair, and can I second that?
There's obviously been a lot of work in this submission.
Um, appreciate your comments, Sven, and I'd just like to ask, I mean, do you...
From what you've said, would you agree with what other people have said,
in that currently councils socialize benefits and privatize
losses, and regulatory relief reverses
that?
Uh, yeah, absolutely. I mean, there's a little bit of, finessing to do with the
regulatory relief as it is now, but, um-We're seeing a
real, adversarial system under the RMA
right now, and it's sort of losing the room a bit. Um, and it doesn't need to.
There's, there's win-wins out there that could be
had.
Thank you.
Could you give some further examples of that, Sven, where, you
say that losing the room, it, it-
Yeah. Yeah. Um, we've just been through our district plan review, or it's still
ongoing 'cause we've, got an exemption to continue with parts of it.
Um,
there was such a groundswell of opposition to
overlays that were proposed in our district plan, that there
was a group of over two hu- 200 rate payers got together
and, to, to fight against it. It's quite a lot of
people in our little district. Um, there
was 2,994 out of our
17,000 odd properties, which was an
area of
658,000, or basically 91% of our district was covered
in these overlays, which is where I come into the regulatory quality.
Um, I think the cost of it would bring
in, a bit of balance there to, you know, are the
jus- is it really justified, in all these places, or can we
narrow it down to the really, genuinely
valuable bits? And where they are valuable, people respond to
incentive, whether it's positive or negative.
So if we can have positive incentives rather than negative incentives,
then we're working with people, not against them.
Um, but there's a... Yeah, the, the district plan process
drew on a lot unnecessarily. There's more cost to council that way as well, so you
might as well be putting the cost into the positive incentives, I
suppose.
Yeah, no, thank you for-
Can I just top on that, Chair?
... putting that into context. Yes, you can, Cameron.
Thank you, Chair. Uh, d- we've had some submissions, Sven, saying that,
it's not fair to have, central government imposing through
standards costs that local government would have to pay, in the regulatory
function. Do you think that, costs that are being imposed centrally
should be paid for by central government?
Um, oh, I don't have a strong
feeling on that. Um,
there might also be an argument that if...
I think we need to give councils a genuine choice here, though, because,
the elected members can't necessarily go changing the maps under the current
RMA. So I think, it might be quite important to have a bit of a
safety valve in there so that the decision can be made locally, but
then the, perhaps the cost of it should be local as well where the decision's
made. Um, otherwise, yeah, it probably should be
central, centrally funded, if the, if the
decision's, if there is no real local decision.
Thank you.
Look, thank you very much, Sven. A, a really good submission.
Um, a lot to take on board there, and, and really appreciate your time this
afternoon. So thank you, and Victoria.
Great. Thank you.
So we now move on to our next submitter for the day,
Recreation Aotearoa.
Uh, kia ora both.
Kia ora. We can see you both there, Sarah and Sam.
Welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
Kia ora.
Uh, you have 15 minutes with us, so, we'll hand it over to you to talk us
through your submission and then open for questions.
Uh, thank you very much. Um, good afternoon, Madam Chair and members of the select
committee. Uh, my name's Sarah Murray, and I'm the CE of Recreation
Aotearoa, and I'm here today with my colleague, advocacy manager Sam
Newton. Uh, we represent the collective voice of the recreation
sector, the sector that provides and manages recreation infrastructure and
services across New Zealand. Uh, the parks, neighborhood green
spaces, trails, sports fields, playgrounds, and other built and natural
infrastructure that underpin our quality of life.
Uh, recreational physical activity generates 8.4 billion in net health
benefits annually. It improves our physical health, reduces the
prevalence of mental health conditions and chronic disease, and as I
said, improves our quality of life.
Um, economically, the recreation industry contributes 2% of New Zealand's annual
GDP, and it employs over 72,000
people. We appear before you today because this
reform is a once in a generation opportunity to realign our planning
system with the actual needs of New Zealanders.
However, as currently drafted, these bills, risk locking in
poo- poor urban form and poor outcomes for New Zealanders for decades to
come.
Um, as you likely know, local government is the single largest
investor in recreation, infrastructure, spending over
1.3 billion a year on provision. The policy settings that
mandate local government, or conversely impose costs or constraints on
provision, have a huge effect on the quality and availability of
recreation opportunities. Our planning legislation must
explicitly protect and provide for recreation infrastructure,
including accessible public green spaces.
The Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment in his 2023 report, Are
We Building Harder, Hotter Cities?, highlighted the issues that we face
and provided a stark warning. In Auckland and in
Hamilton, city-wide green space has declined by 15% since
the 1940s, and much of this loss has been private green
space, backyards. In newer developments, green space now
accounts for just 20 to 30% of individual sect- sections,
half of the historical average. We have fundamentally less green
space in our towns and cities than we had in the past.And as
we intensify our cities, which we must, we need a planning
regime that recognizes and addresses this.
We need to offset the ongoing loss of private green space with quality public
space. And of course, these spaces are not just nice to have
amenities, they're essential nature-based solutions to problems ranging from
climate change to public health and social cohesion.
They're giant sponges, absorbing and reducing stormwater.
They're urban air, air conditioners, cleaning and cooling the air we
breathe. They're our third places, the public places outside of
home and work where we come together, connect, play, rest, and are
restored.
New Zealand is a great place to live, and we enjoy some of the best quality of life
in the world, and one of the big reasons for this is the quality and
availability of recreation infrastructure.
Spending time outdoors, walking the dog in your local reserve, having a
picnic or kicking a ball around the park with the kids, these are the things that
make life good and bring us joy. Without a planning regime that
protects and enables the ongoing provision of these places, we're putting all that
at risk. Quality intensification and our ongoing quality of
life requires quality recreation infrastructure.
I'll now hand over to Sam to outline some of the specific changes we believe are
required to achieve this vision and secure a better future for New
Zealand.
Kia ora. Thank you, Sarah. Um, to ensure these bills deliver a New Zealand that our
children wish to remain in and is attractive to thousand
migrants, Recreation Aotearoa urges five specific
changes. Firstly, we would like an, recognition,
explicit recognition of recreation.
Amenity is not recreation. Historically, the omission of the word
recreation from the RMA forced planners to shoehorn physical
activity and community health under the term
amenity. Amenity relates to sensory experience, how a place
looks. Recreation relates to the physical use, health, and
functionality of a space. Our ask is that, recreation is
inserted into the goals of both the Planning and Natural Environment
Bill-- Planning Bill and the Natural Environment Bill.
Secondly, we'd like to see, elevation of the
status to essential infrastructure.
The Planning Bill currently creates a problematic hierarchy.
Water, roads, that kind of thing, are development infrastructure and
mandatory. While parks are additional infrastructure that councils
only need to be satisfied might be available.
This treats our parks as op-optional discretionary services.
Access to quality green space is fundamental to living standards and what endears
New Zealand to New Zealanders. Our ask in that space is that
formally, we formally recognize public open space and green
networks as essential public infrastructure in these
bills. Thirdly,
some sort of national direction. There's a structural incompleteness in the bills
at the moment. The new system relies on national consistency, yet there is
no national framework for open space or parks.
This leaves councils, particularly smaller ones, without the tools to provide parks
and green space during periods of rapid growth.
Our ask is that it's mandated or mandate the dev-development of an
NPS, National Policy Statement, for open space and/or parks
to establish minimum baseline metrics for the quantity, quality, and
eq-equitable access to parks and open spaces.
Fourthly, a mandate around recreation assessments.
Decisions about our future must be evidence-based.
We need to identify and lock in recreation spaces during the
thirty-year regional spatial planning process.
So that is before land prices are driven up by development,
expectations. Recreation assessments are as
codified and as formative and as important as
environmental or cultural assessments.
This mechanism and the professionals that provide it stand ready to play a
role in improving outcomes. So our ask is
that we mandate recreation assessments in Schedule 6 of the Planning Bill for all
significant infrastructure and urban development projects.
Not everything, just the big ones.
Finally, our most urgent concern, and perhaps of many
submitters, is re-- with regard to regulatory re-relief.
As drafted, the acquisition, designation, or establishment of
reserves could be deemed as a regulatory taking, subject
to financial compensation. The outdoor third spaces of our
city must be seen as a fundamental requirement of subdivision, not an
optional restriction that council must pay back to
developers. If councils face a prohibitive financial liability
every time they secure land for recreation or a reserve, they will simply
opt out. This could mean the permanent loss of public access to New Zealand's
waterways, green spaces, the crit-- removal of critical
nature-based stormwater solutions, and many other poor
outcomes, as well as sub-suboptimal green space
outcomes in many of our communities.
Our ask in this realm is that we amend Section 3, that's the
interpretation
of both bills, to explicitly exclude recreation-- reserve
recreation, reserve creation from the definition of a
specified topic. We'd also like it clarified that rules requiring a
portion of land to be vested as a reserve do not
constitute a significant impact on the reasonable use of
land, and therefore do not trigger relief.
Uh, Chair and committee members, we've got an opportunity here to
protect and enhance the quality of life of New Zealanders through these
reforms. We can choose to build cities that are merely a collection of
dwellings, or we can build vibrant, resilient communities where every New
Zealander can benefit from ready access to quality public
recreational spaces. By making some minor amendments to these draft
bills, this government can deliver a New Zealand that's not just more
productive, but is more livable for generations to come.
Uh, thank you for your time today, and we welcome, any questions.
Look, thank you very much, Sarah and Sam.
Uh, a really interesting submission, and looking at recreation, of
course, being an avid sports person myself, yeah,
very, very interested in this. Look, I,
s- s- schedule six, you talked about mandating recreational
infrastructure, but not everything, just the big ones.
Like, what do you mean by that? And how-
Recreation assessments.
Yeah.
So these are, are assessments, carried out by professionals to
assess the impact of any given development on the recreational spaces and
places and opportunities in that space.
It's a pretty codified, part of our
industry. Um, many consultants, offer that
service.
Yeah, okay. And you gave, Hamilton and Auckland as an
example in, in your submission, you know, saying that reduced
green spaces by 15%. Um, it-- can you give maybe
some examples of where you feel that the space has been
reduced where it perhaps shouldn't have been,
and where your concern is across the country?
So for-
Yeah, so-
You go, Sarah.
Thank you, Sam. Um, so that, that data comes from the Parliamentary
Commissioner for the Environment's, report over a really long period.
So looking at, the change since the 1940s.
Um, the broader point there, and I think the thing, the concern, I guess, that
we really wanna convey to the committee is that, without
adequate, without adequate,
an adequate planning regime in place, there's a risk
that the incremental loss of green space in our communities will decline.
And that's all about making sure or recognizing that,
we are, we are living on smaller sections.
We, we have smaller backyards.
Um, many New Zealanders now don't have any backyard at all.
Um, those spaces actually, have been really important
historically in terms of providing spaces for us to be active, and we need to
be, conscious and intentional around offsetting that loss with
public spaces. And I think, you know, there's a number of
examples, many examples, I suspect, around the country where developments
have not included adequate public space and particularly adequate public green
space, to provide those communities with places to be
active. Uh, there's nothing in, the current
RMA that, that provides for that, and actually these draft bills kind
of perpetuate that issue. So we're asking you to, look at how we can
address that, in, the proposals that are on the table at the
moment.
So in terms of your vision, would it be looking for, more green
spaces across more areas and more opportunities to have
recreational activity? Um, or you're seeing some cities,
I suppose if I gave my, my own, like Hastings, they've built this huge massive
sports park, which is a fantastic incredible piece of infrastructure that
everybody uses here, and they use that as a very much a, a
recreational place to go to. Um, and that's, you know, taken a
bit of time to build up over time, but it's an incredible piece of infrastructure
now.
Yeah. Um, we wanna see more of that, and we wanna see that locked in in
terms of the, the planning legislation.
So Sam talked about, a national policy statement for open space provision.
So we wanna see, some consistent,
and, um established minimum baselines for access
to, open space. Every, every family in New
Zealand should be able to walk, a pretty short distance and
find somewhere to kick a ball around or throw a fr- fris- frisbee or
have, the kids, go and play.
And unfortunately, that's not, the case in every community in New Zealand, and
we certainly don't want to see that, get worse across the
country.
Thank you. Cameron.
Thank you, Chair. I just, something you said just now, Sarah, you know,
walk a pretty short distance, and something I heard Sam say that this is an
established, framework for assessing with,
with experts who understand, you
know, the, the area. There's been a concern amongst,
m- many people who interact with the current RMA that it leads
to something called colloquially an expert off.
What would-- if we were to add this as a, a, part
of the bill, what would re- constrain this from becoming yet
another expert off?
Hmm. Um, good question. So just to, to, just to provide some context around the
kind of metrics that, these ex- recreation assessors might use
is, percentage of the population that lives within five hundred meters of park.
And it speaks to the previous question and Sarah's response to
that. Um, we're only really advocating recreation
assessments in really big, projects.
It's certainly not the, the, the rats and mice, the, the
renovations or, you know, individual, consents.
But, big infrastructure developments, big
subdivisions, lock in recreation outcomes for
generations to come. It is entirely,
reasonable and feasible, feasible that,
those outcomes are considered and understood, by way of recreation
assessment.
Look, thank you very much, Sam and Sarah.
Really interesting submission. And look, we commend you for the
work that you're doing and advocacy in this area to get,
more people into recreation, and active and healthy.
So, thank you very much for your submission today.
Thank you.
So we now move through to our next submitter,
Fletcher Residential
Limited.So
we'll just wait for Aidan, to pop through there.
You just may need to accept your panelist prompt,
Aidan, if you can hear us.
Aidan, you just need to turn your camera on and your mic.
And yes, that would be helpful. There we go.
We can, we can see you there, Aidan.
Welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
Uh, look, you've got 20 minutes with us.
Take your submission as read, and we'll hand over to you to talk us
through the main points. Thank you.
Oh, we can't hear you. You just need to pop your microphone on
there.
How's that?
There we go. We've got volume. There you go.
Thank you, Madam Chair and to subcommittee members.
Um, thank you for the opportunity to attend today
to talk to our submission. With me is Nicole Moana, our
in-house legal counsel. Uh, my name's Aidan Donnelly.
I'm General Manager of Development and Apartments at Fletcher
Residential. Um, firstly, Fletcher Residential, just a quick overview of
us. We are one of New Zealand's largest residential developers,
delivering master plan communities and large scale housing
projects in both bream-- brownfield and greenfield
locations. We're also one of the largest development partners
with iwi, central government and local government in the
Auckland and Canterbury regions.
Uh, we have extensive experience in that context of
working with the RMA and navigating the consent
system. Most of our projects are large scale urban developments,
commonly with several hundred homes delivered in stages.
We are committed to quality urban design,
centered on creating resilient and enduring communities through the
integration of land, housing, open space parks,
school, hard and soft infrastructure, including hazard
mitigation measures. Um, just touching
on a brief few points of our
submission. Uh, our general position is one of,
support to the reform and splitting the system into two bills.
Uh, that is provided that the new system delivers greater certainty of time
frames, costs, and reduces the regulatory
risk, which is all essential to enabling housing
supply at scale and the necessary infrastructure
required to support the communities that we are
delivering. We support the government's
intention to create a system that's more enabling
and more certain and efficient for investment and development, while
also safeguarding environmental and community outcomes.
We support the intent to provide clearer national direction to
achieve the right balance between urban development and safeguarding the
natural environment.
An overarching theme of our submission is that the reforms
won't support increased housing
unless the current issues with land supply and infrastructure
are fixed contemporaneously.
Secondly, in terms of the minimum time frames for submissions on some of the key
documents, being the regional spatial
plans, the natural environmental plans, the land use
plans, we believe that it's necessary to provide a
reasonable opportunity for feedback in that plan making
process in order that we don't have rush plans.
So we suggest that the minimum time frames for submissions on
those key plans is amended to have the ability to extend
that time frame to forty working days as opposed to the
current twenty working days.
The focus in that is on getting those documents right and
working through that process with the parties
involved. Both bills require decision makers
to seek to achieve statutory goals.
To help address the timeliness of consent and planning processes,
we think a more directive must give effect to requirement would be
helpful. Uh, there is merit, we believe, in introducing
consistent, enforceable time frames for all steps of the planning and
consenting process with mechanisms for non-performance by
decision makers. The planning bill contains a new
requirement that all permitted activities must either be registered or fall
within specified listed matters.
We do not support this. It's unclear what purpose would be
served by requiring per-permitted activities to be
registered, and this appears to be an unnecessary
and onerous addition for little benefit resulting.
Turning to spatial planning, we support
regional spatial planning. Um, done well, it's a very helpful
tool. Um, and obviously, as the committee will be aware,
it's intended to guide the long-term growth and infrastructure and land use
planning. We consider, though, that unless the
planning is prescriptive, binding, and aligned with funding
commitments, RSPs risk becoming
aspirational documents. RSPs only unlock
capacity if they give effect to that capacity and
practice. We encourage the early release of draft
spatial options and growth scenarios, and we would welcome
genuine, early, meaningful involvement of the private sector and
other stakeholders in the formulation of those RSPs and plan
making. Uh, we believe that will be key to achieving the
goal of spatial planning done
well.We also believe that
it's important to have the right experience and expertise involved
in the drafting stages of those RSPs to make
sure that they are practical and workable in
practice. And in our view, this should include an obligation to
consider development feasibility evidence.
It should require regional committees to explicitly consider and test
RSPs against staging financial feasibility
and market deliverability when deciding growth areas and
densities. We believe there should be a stronger obligation to give
effect to national housing and infrastructure direction, and
central oversight where regions fall
short. And we believe it would be helpful to
mandate publication of development capacity and feasibility
reports alongside the RSPs.
So we support the 10-year time period for RSPs.
However, there needs to be mechanisms and flexibility provided
for in the act
for new opportunities and solutions to be introduced prior
to full reviews being undertaken.
To this end, we believe it's important to retain the ability for private
plan changes to be brought
forward. Turning to a lot of the work
that we do, which is large scale development, we
believe that a development pathway would be helpful
to have within the acts for large scale development
projects. In that respect, there are good examples where large scale
development happens in a collaborative approach between central and
local government, the private sector, and we believe
that can help address key issues. But there also needs to be a willingness to
engage rather than default to regulation
alone. We believe that the proposed system should
provide predictable and efficient pathways for large scale
projects, and a large scale development pathway
would enable this through, for example, pre-approved
development envelopes and RSPs and NEP's.
A standard assessment criteria for eligible projects and
prioritized processing for projects that align with those spatial
strategies. We also believe there's benefit in considering an
outline planning application
type of process, which can be lodged and approved at the early stages
of a project. So this is a preliminary request
to establish and get approval for the principle of the development, the
concept of the development, with the detail to
come at a second step.
We believe the clear environmental assessment templates will
help to reduce duplication. Uh, but ultimately, to
successfully deliver these reforms, we would suggest that
simply bolting on
the new requirements to the existing decision-making system
won't achieve the full potential benefits of
the work that this government is doing.
There is a critical need for organizational cultural change in those
local authorities and decision makers who are accountable for the planning,
development and environmental regulation and infrastructure.
There needs to be a strong will to enable and foster growth while
achieving quality urban development and natural environment
outcomes. The focus needs to be on how we make it happen and a
practical, supportive approach, particularly focusing on partnerships
and how the private sector can work with the public sector and other
stakeholders. In turning to the transition
arrangements, we believe that
ensuring that the transition from the RMA to the new system will take
several years, and we would encourage a well sequenced and managed
implementation of this transition.
During this period, the private sector faces some
uncertainty, so having a clear transition plan will be
helpful. Uh, to that end, we would
request that existing consents and plan provisions remain valid
and operative without additional processes to
come. Uh, there's clear guidance to councils and
prac-practitioners operating within the transitional
consenting regime,
and there's a requirement on councils and government to
maintain adequate resourcing and technical support during that
transition period. We also would
suggest that, there is interim national directions to
apply during the transition period from the RMA to the new instruments
to avoid a patchwork of legacy rules.
So overall, our submission is one of
support. We support the intent of reform,
but we think there's some refinement in
the areas outlined in our submission that would enhance the bills.
Um, and that includes making the system simpler and more
certain, unlocking development capacity for housing and business
growth, and enabling infrastructure to be delivered in a more
efficient and timely manner, and reducing red tape and
delays and inconsistencies. That's a
quick overview on some of the points of our submission.
Um, Nicole and myself are happy to take any questions.
Thank you.
Look, thank you very much, Aidan, for that submission. Um, very thorough.
Lots of considerations there. Look, I've just got a quick one.
Um, permitted activities, you don't believe that they should be registered.
Can you just explain that from a practical sense?
Because, that's been coming through, the submission process.
I'm just interested to get your take on it, how that would impact the, the
day-to-day activities.
Um, we understand that a, a permitted activity is one that is
provided for, and so we don't currently have a
requirement to register those permitted
activities. Um, so to introduce this new
requirement would be a new stepUh, we're
unclear what the purpose, the benefit of
registering them would be. Um,
we could see, yes, it would provide information and
notification, but we're uncertain
what would happen with that registration of a permitted
activity. We don't think that
there's any real benefit from doing
a registration of what is a permitted activity.
So when you s- but what, what practically would you, classify as
one at the moment?
Uh, so where you've got, for instance, a proposed housing development
that meets all of the development controls, the, the planning
controls, the planning rules, is able to be serviced.
If it's a permitted activity, you don't have to obviously apply for-
Right
... a resource consent.
Yeah.
Um, and under the new regime, we would be required
to, apply for registration. Uh, so that would
be an additional step, would involve, cost and
time,
presumably plans, application
information. Um, it, it's hard to
gauge from the information that we have.
But that would be submitted presumably to decision-makers,
and our proposal will be registered, but there would be no
process that follows that.
Okay. So can-
We're unsure what the benefit of doing it is.
Okay. No, thank you for that clarification. Appreciate that.
Look, one last quick question from
Priyanka.
Thank you. Um, Aiden, you've mentioned in the written submission the need for
clarity of national direction, for example, to reduce,
litigation, and made some points around clarity of
environmental limits there as well.
We have had other submitters who have felt that there's too much,
that is delegate... relegated to national
direction, and therefore too much ministerial
concentration of decision-making, amongst ministers
that leads to a lack of stability. Um, I would assume
that stability and consistency would be key for,
a company like yours. I don't see that raised in your submission.
Is that a, is that a concern that you have with the legislation
as it's currently drafted? Um, also, do you have any concerns
around the sequencing between environmental plans and spatial plans
that's come up previously as well?
Thank you. Taking those questions in turn.
Um, our key, tenet
is consistency of the process,
so we're able to work through the process in a
timely and reasonably certain way.
Um,
arguably at the moment, there's an inconsistency across
local government at times in New Zealand around the
RMA process and consent processes and plan
making. That makes it difficult, and the same would apply with
ministerial direction. We can see the benefit of that because if it
provides clarity and direction to
both, decision-makers and companies like
ourselves, then that's helpful. Because ultimately the intent
is: how do we navigate the process and secure the right
approvals in the right manner? So provided that
ministerial direction has the right basis to it, and there is
consistency to it, we can see there's some
merit to the proposal.
I think that-
And... Sorry.
Yeah.
Sorry, just to sup if I may. Thank you.
Just, just one quick sup, Priyanka.
I, I think it wasn't so much about whether there should be national direction or
not, it's more the concern that different ministers can
then change the national direction without changing leg- the primary
legislation.
Yeah, so for us, the consistency through,
reasonable time frames, time periods is really important.
We wouldn't want flip-flopping and changes
in an ad hoc basis. Um, so having that consistency approach
is really important, particularly when you're talking about large scale projects,
large scale investment. Uh, and we're talking several
years in which we're developing a number of these
communities, and so we wouldn't want a change of
approach halfway through.
Look, thank you very much, Aiden. I think that's a good point to leave it.
Uh, we have met time. We've actually gone over time, but we appreciate, your
time, and that very thorough submission, so thank
you.
Thank you very much.
Look, members, we are now going to break, till
2:30, and then we will resume. Thank
you.Welcome
back, everyone,
to our submission hearings this afternoon.
Um, we will welcome through now, Ngā
iwi o Te Tohu, Taihu.
So, we should be seeing
Corey.
Welcome, Corey, to the select committee this
afternoon. Uh, look, you have 15 minutes with
us. Um, take your submission as read, but,
of course, you'll have some points that you'd most probably like to make.
So look, we'll hand that over to you to, for your opening remarks, and then we'll
open up for some questions. So over to you, Corey.
Kia ora. Thank you. Uh, tēnā koutou nga mema o te komiti, tēnā koutou
katoa. Ko Corey Hewitt tōku ingoa.
He uri ahau, nō Rangitāne o Wairau.
I tēnei rā kei te kōrero au, kei raro i te korowai o Ngā iwi o Te
Tau Ihu. Arā, Ngāti Koata, Ngāti Tama, Te Ātiawa o te
Waka a Māui, Ngāti Raroa, Ngāti Kuia, Ngāti Apakīterao,
Ngāti Tōrangatira me Rangitāne o Wairau.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you to the members of the committee for the
opportunity to speak to our written submission.
Uh, it's my pleasure to be able to speak with you today on behalf of Ngā iwi o Te
Tau Ihu.
Uh, we're presenting this submission as a collective because these bills
represent the most significant restructuring of environmental and land use
decision-making in a generation.
Uh, and much of our respective, treaty settlement redress is built upon the
Resource Management Act, and was negotiated in light of
it. Uh, these reforms shift power upstream into national
direction, national limits, and early plan-making stages.
If iwi and hapū are not embedded at the start, the system will move
without us. There is a, a whakataukī, nothing about us
without us. These bills will impact everything around us, largely
without us. That is why the eight iwi of Te Tau Ihu have come
together with this submission. Uh, Ngā iwi o Te Tau
Ihu oppose the current drafting of these bills as they relate to Māori rights
and interests. Uh, in the current form, the bills do not honor Te Tiriti o
Waitangi, and they risk rolling back Māori influence and
participation that has become normal practice under the RMA, replacing it
with a, a much narrower and more procedural form of
engagement. Now, as you've, as you've mentioned, I won't cover off our whole
submission during the presentation today, but I do intend to cover off,
six key issues from our perspective.
And the first key issue is that Te Tiriti o Waitangi is narrowed and not
strengthened through these bills.
Under the RMA, decision-makers are required to take treaty principles into
account in a broad sense. That provides a very real and existing legal
foundation for Māori participation across the
systemUh, both of these bills essentially repeal that broad
foundation and replace it with a narrow and specific treaty duties,
s- piece of, wording, largely focused on upholding
existing settlement arrangements and some consultation on national direction.
The practical effect is that what is not explicitly listed risks being
ignored, including the principle of active protection.
So our first and clearest ask is a simple one, and it is to
reinstate a strong treaty clause in both bills.
A clear duty that those exercising powers under the acts must give
effect to the principles of Te Tiriti o Waitangi.
Closely linked to this, the bills define Māori interests too narrowly.
We are asking for these provisions to be broadened so that Mātauranga
Māori, Kaitiakitanga and treaty principles are binding
requirements, and that Māori interests are not traded
off, against other goals. Uh, key issue
number two is that settlement redress is placed at risk.
Uh, the bills state that treaty settlement instruments are to be carried across
with, quote, "The same or equivalent effect".
Uh, however, equivalent effect is undefined.
There is a, a two-year sunset clause.
Many settlement tools were designed for an RMA-based system, and that is now
being, dismantled. In Te Taihu, our settlements
include statutory acknowledgements and agreed processes that rely on
local planning and consenting pathways.
If decisions are now made through different mechanisms, national direction,
combined plans or reduced consenting, then those settlement rights
must be translated into equally effective roles in the new
system. Otherwise, those very hard fought for settlement
redress instruments are diminished in practice.
The two-year sunset is particularly concerning.
Settlement redress should not be weakened by the passage of time.
Uh, and so we are asking the committee to remove the two-year sunset
to define equivalent effect in the legislation and default to
preserving the iwi benefit where direct equivalence is not
possible. We're also concerned that the bills remove or
restrict tools that allow iwi and councils to build new
local agreements, such as iwi participation arrangements, Mana
Whakahono ā Rohe, and accords.
In Te Taihu, local partnership models have been hard-won and
effective. The new system should build on what works, and not
attempt to freeze it in time or to step backwards.
Our third key issue is that consultation replaces
partnership. The planning bill introduces new structures, such as
regional spatial strategies, the combined plans, independent hearing
panels, but it does not guarantee Māori decision-making roles
within them. Iwi and hapū are positioned as consultees, not as
partners, as was contended at the time of our settlements and in terms
of Te Tiriti. In practical terms, this means that plans
that profoundly affect iwi can be developed without Māori voices at the
table, that hearing panels may lack Mātauranga Māori or tikanga
expertise, and that iwi may be acknowledged procedurally, but
ignored substantively. This is especially problematic
because the new system significantly reduces the number of resource
consents. Under the RMA, consents were often the last line of
defense for iwi to protect our taonga and it place-- and our places of
significance. Under the new system, if iwi are not embedded in
plan making, the opportunity simply vanishes.
We're asking for guaranteed iwi and hapū representation on planning
committees, Māori expertise to be considered on independent hearing
panels, and stronger duties of early engagement and co-development, not
late-stage consultation. Uh, key issue number
four, I'm gonna speak to some examples in Te Taihu where we see some specific
examples, of our concerns. Uh, Te Pōkohiwi o Kupe
is one of the most significant archaeological and s- cultural sites in
Aotearoa. Uh, it is a wāhi tapu, a cultural landscape, and a place
already under pressure from climate change and
erosion. Under the Nat-Natural Environment Bill,
national environmental limits could be set that technically meet
biodiversity or erosion thresholds but still fail to
protect the cultural integrity, of the site as a living wāhi
tapu. One of those-- Uh, once those limits are set, regional
plans must comply. The ability for iwi to require stronger
place-specific protections would be constrained.
Also, in this regard, we've got silent files on wāhi tapu across Te
Taihu, but I'm also aware that happens more broadly.
That silent files where we consider things like our urupā and, and
particularly sacred sites of significance to us.
The planning bill strongly favors publicly mapped sites and introduces
regulatory relief for landowners.
Together, these changes create a perverse incentive.
Councils may avoid identifying sites of significance because of cost
exposure, which I note will become increasingly prevalent should a rates capping
regime be implemented. Um, and iwi are always, are also forced
to choose between confidentiality of those sites and the protection of
them. Unmapped sites, may receive no protection at
all, and activities may proceed without iwi notification.
Te Taihu iwi also hold multiple statutory acknowledgements across rivers,
coastal areas, and landscapes. Under the planning bill, notification thresholds
are raised, and statutory acknowledgements are no longer treated as a clear trigger
for iwi involvement. Activities could occur within acknowledged
areas without iwi ever being notified, fundamentally undermining the intent
of our settlement redress.
Key issue number five is that both bills front an enormous
work program, national direction, environmental limits, new
plans, while the existing s- systems continue to
operate. Iwi and hapū are expected to engage nationally,
regionally, and locally at the same time.
Without guaranteed resourcing, Māori participation becomes an empty
right. It'll be present on paper, but impossible in practice.
And so we're asking for an explicit duty on the minister to ensure iwi
and hapū are properly resourced, that joint working groups are developed during
plan drafting, and a modest extension of the implementation
timeframes so that participation is meaningful and not
rushed.Uh, key issue number six, and this is our final one before
I'll make some closing remarks. Uh, under the Natural Environment bill,
environmental limits and allocation are closely linked, but
allocation frameworks are largely left unresolved.
Uh, we're concerned that iwi and hapū are excluded from monitoring and enforcement
roles. Um, partnership should not stop at planning and should extend to
the active kaitiaki role that we play on the ground.
These reforms also centralize environmental data and
decision-making. Uh, Māori data sovereignty must be recognized and
protected, or the system risks undermining Māori authority, over
both knowledge and outcomes. To close, our
message to the committee is straightforward.
These bills can work, but only if they are amended
to, n- one, restore a strong treaty foundation.
Two, properly protect settlement redress and local agreements.
Three, embed Māori decision-making roles and expertise.
Four, respect tikanga-based protection of cultural heritage.
Uh, five, resource iwi participation properly.
Uh, six, co-design environmental limits and share monitoring
and enforcement. Uh, kia au ki te mana o ngā iwi, kia
mau ki te oranga tūngitanga o te taiao.
Uh, thank you, and I'm, happy to pass over if there is remaining
time for any questions, Madam Chair.
Kia ora, Corey. Thank you for your very thorough
submission. Uh, look, Huhana's got a question, so we'll go to
Huhana.
Mia tau ana ke ngā iwi o Te Tau Iho Te Waka e Corey.
E mihi nui ana mō o whakaaro me ngā whakahau ngā
tohutohu o ngā iwi. Um, thanking you
heaps for, the clear, succinct submission that we've
received and the recom- the clarity that you've provided them in terms of the
recommendations. Um, mindful that Te Tau
Ihu, has, has had hard-fought wins over a number of
years, and heard you speak to
genuine meaningful engagement, the
need for not only, iwi of Te Tau
Ihu to be a part of the planning process, but you also need to be resourced as part
of implementation and engagement throughout.
Have you found, or have, have the iwi of Te Tau Ihu o Te Waka
been engaged or consulted on in any of the drafting of this
legislation? Did any of the officials get down to you?
And, what was the quality of that engagement that you may have received?
Uh, yes. Thank you for the question, Huhana.
Um, yeah, we have had engagement with officials, and, and want to
acknowledge the way in which they've approached that.
They're obviously working within a set of principles that the scheme,
and that the bill sits under. And so if I think about the likes of the Māori
interests goal, I think th- that sits there as something that has
the potential to have positive outcomes, and
to, flow through into, into,
potentially good outcomes. But again, it ends up with that potential for it to be
traded off, in other areas. Uh, and so I guess officials have been
working within the confines of a system which we think, is
missing, some fundamental pieces, for example, that, that
overarching treaty clause, which would provide a, a much greater
sort of, system in which we could operate.
Um, therefore, officials are operating within the bounds of that.
There has been some resourcing provided, and the engagement with officials has
been, positive. But obviously, they were working, and we're all working
within some policy decisions that have been taken around the direction, of, of
the bills.
Look, thank you very much, Corey. Um, we
appreciate your time today and your submission, and it's good to hear
that, you've been working with, officials throughout.
Um, and so some, some very valid considerations there, so,
appreciate your time on it, so thank you.
Kia ora.
So look, we now move to our next submitter for the day, Wellington City
Council.
So we'll just wait for, Wellington City Council to
come through. Um, we can see that you're
there. Perhaps you just want to turn on the camera,
so that we can see
you.
Um, perhaps they also need to accept the panelist
prompt, which will bring you through as
well. We're having some issues
there.
Um, Jayden or Anna, we're having a few issues with,
Wellington City Council bringing them through.
Madam Chair, they're in the panel.
Uh, looks like they might just need to turn their camera on and link the
audio in.
Okay. Um, W- Wellington City Council, if you can
hear me, you just need to turn your camera
on, so that-We can see you. I
see that, th- we've got audio potentially connecting at the
moment.
Um, Clark, have they, ac- accepted the panelist
prompt?
Yes.
Okay, so that, they're in, they're just trying to get things sorted at their
end.
I think so. The, um-
Okay
... it may be that they are using a, you know, a t- a Microsoft Teams
room.
Okay.
And just trying to get the Zoom to work.
Ha- Is, is Retail New Zealand with us at all?
No.
Okay.
We will just await Wellington City Council to,
just try and sort out their,
camera.
Chair, Retail New Zealand has just joined the Zoom.
Okay. Shall we try and bring... We'll, we'll try and bring Retail New Zealand
through, and, we will come back to the
Wellington City Council and, and see if they can try and sort out their
technology.
I will give them a call and see if I can help resolve.
Okay. Yeah, that'd be great. Thank
you.
Um, so we're going to just now try and bring through, Retail New
Zealand, and see if
that works. So a few technical
difficulties with Wellington City Council. There we go. We, we have Denise.
Kia ora. Can you, can you see me and hear me?
Yes, we can.
Perfectly.
We can. Look, thank you for joining us a little earlier.
Uh, we've had our previous submitter just struggling a little bit with the
technology. So, we will, come to you, if
that's okay, Denise. Uh, and-
Yes.
Uh-
There-
... we will, we'll open up. And so if you just, open up with
your remarks and your submission, and then we'll open up for questions.
Awesome. I'm not sure if my colleague Ben has also managed to-
We can see Ben
... log on.
Yes.
Perfect.
Yes, we can.
That's great. I was, uh... Just before I throw to him awkwardly and he never
responds. Um, anyway, I'm Denise.
Um, I'm the, Manager of Advocacy at Retail
NZ. Um, I am joined by my colleague Ben, who hopefully is having
better luck with technology than, Wellington City Council.
Ben, I'm not sure if you wanted to introduce yourself as well.
Yes. Yep, hello, I'm Ben. I'm the, analyst, policy and insights analyst
over at Retail NZ.
Kia ora, Ben. Um, so we, our
submission, our submission obviously you would have read that we are
largely in support of this, the, the
planning bill as it is, a- and it, and its aims and
goals in terms of setting out,
clear, clearly and, eliminating some of
the, that uncertainty that, a- and
frustration, I guess, that surrounds, con- the
consenting process and the, at, at the
moment. We think that this does, um...
obviously a very well thought out and complex, piece of work.
Um, and we does, do think it set out really clearly the
intentions, of how this will work,
how it will simplify, and how it will provide certainty for
retailers, businesses in general through the future.
Um, we do think, that it's worth
highlighting just a couple of things around, there is probably
space for some added clarity, in some
respects, in terms of ensuring
that,
businesses, retailers who are wanting to undergo,
building works are really clear as to the
considerations they need to make and in, and in what
order. Um, and we also, think that it's
really important that there are those sort of regional
specific, areas that,
that space for region specific,
rules and, and things to be put in place because every community is very
different in New Zealand. Um, obviously very
spread out, and from the smallest of the
small to the biggest of the big. Um, we also think that,
potentially then it just needs to be, a little bit of grace
given in some of the timelines that this legislation is talking
about, just in terms with, some of the other legislative work
that is, going on, especially around potential changes to,
the Local Government Act, and ensuring that, there is enough
time and space for, both of
these, pieces of legislation, I guess, to,
to be underway and
not having any part- like, not having this,
the spatial plan specifically rushed, through at a,
at a local level. Um, those are just kind of a few things that
we, we think do need to be considered a little bit further from, from
what's, currently read. Um, and unless
Ben has anything he'd like to add, I think we're just happy to
answer any questions you may have.
Look, thank you very much, Denise and Ben, for your
submission. Uh, we have a question from Cameron
Luxton.
Thank you, Chair. Um,
Retail NZ submi- your submission, recommendation, paragraph
five, not... We recommend
a direction on h- how the goals will be, set as in a
hierarchy. How do you... Have you given any thought, further thought to that?
I think the recommendation's kinda light on, on what you would, what you think is
the best way to solve, a hierarchy and, and
uncertainty based on the goals. Do you wanna expand on that?
Yeah. And I think that pro- depending on, what
retailer you are, whereabouts you are, you may have
your own views as to what should trump
another thing within that, that, goal
selection. What we are, and what retailers are wanting
from this regis- legislation is certainty and
clarity. I think there's recognition that w- wherever you
are, you might have different views, and so if that is set at that sort
of, in, in that, in those national instruments, I think that would
provide greater clarity, less of,
less anxiety about misinterpretation.
We do not hold any views as to what should go first, what should go last.
That is just something that we have heard, in terms of
feedback that, retailers would probably
prefer to be told rather than trying to read the tea
leaves as it were.
Understood. So it's not necessarily that you think, there's specific goals
that should be in a hierarchy, but there should be a way for us to, look at a
law and understand what will be weighed up against each other.
Um-
Exactly.
Yeah. Okay, thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um, look, Denise, I just wanted to, ask a couple of questions around
Clause 14, 'cause that's come up quite a lot through our submission
process. I'd be interested to hear from you, whether you have any
examples where you've... 'Cause you're obviously in support of it,
where retailers, you know, have been impacted or faced
problems under the current system, and by those
exclusions, you know, that's gonna be positive for
retailers wanting to develop stores or, or infrastructure.
Yes. Um, my colleague, Ben and I were
discussing this, prior to, to, to coming on, and
I'll just try and get the list in front of me,
of those exclusions. Bear with me.
Ben, I'm not sure if you have them in front of you in terms of being able to
come up with an example.
So visual amenity is one of them, which,
we, was raised, by the supermarkets yesterday.
Um, but I was just interested from a retail point of view whether you had anything
at hand where you could, potentially explain, you know, why you're so
supportive of it.
I think we,
we heard from a general kind of business
point of view, again, the fact that it is, they're
specifically, listed,
in terms of those
exclusions, and there didn't seem to be anything that was
particularly, I guess, worrying to our members.
Um, Ben, I'm not sure if there was anything that you wanted to
add there.
I don't think we have any specific examples from, from our
retailers.
No, I don't think our members gave us specific examples.
Um, but we, we, when we were just talking before,
we felt comfortable that,
it gave enough
room for, i- i- in local communities
to, what's the word? Um, I guess fi-
find the balance,
within that local community. Is that...
We were talking about that, weren't we, Denise?
Yeah. Yeah, absolutely, in terms of, and, and a- again, going back to one
of those opening remarks I made about the, the, the differences,
at, within each individual community and what
might be best, i- in specific
ex- ex...
specific circumstances. Um, but yeah,
again, we
generally supportive of the, the, it from a clarity
perspective, as opposed to having any
specific examples as to, to where this would particularly
benefit.
Okay. Well, thank you very much, Denise and Ben.
It appears we have no further questions.
Look, we thank you very much for, your time today and,
for your submission, and obviously, giving us,
Retail New Zealand's perspective on the, the new bill.
So thank you.
Kia ora. Thank you.
So we will try and go to Wellington City Council again
and see whether we can bring them through.
Um, hopefully the technology is working now. Oh, there we go.
We can see you, Andrew, and, Ben, is it?
And Michael. Welcome to the select committee this afternoon,
Andrew. Uh, you're very familiar with this process, so,
we will hand it over to you to, talk us through your submission.
You've got 15 minutes with us, so, over to you.
Thank you very much. Thank you, Catherine.
And I'm with, Liam Hodgetts and, Michael.
Um, Ben is unavailable this afternoon,
unfortunately. Um, so look, given the time available, I'll just quickly sort
of just provide some, high-level remarks.
You'll see through our submission, which, which focuses on more sort of technical
improvements, but just to be clear, we're generally supportive of
the, the, the direction that the bills take.
Um, we are very keen to see a, a much less,
litigious-Uh, approach and less red tape when it comes
to planning and, and consent processes.
So I'm very supportive of that. Um, in,
in relation to specific areas, you know,
we, we welcome the,
proposed national direction and standard zone,
content, which we think will make plans clearer and allow us, the
council to focus on, important issues.
Um, and we welcome the, the nationally consistent,
implementation and, and advice that the government or that will come
through. Um, greater consistency between council
regions and areas will be better for everybody.
So, and
obviously aligning with national direction instruments is gonna be, very
helpful. Likewise, regional spatial plans,
we support and the support the greater teeth being given
to having those and enforcing them as well.
Um,
some areas where we think some attention could be, be beneficial
in relation to Treaty of Waitangi clause.
Understand it's the, the general approach taken to drafting
of clauses, which is for bills to specify how,
Treaty of Waitangi obligations will be met.
We just note, however, that
given what's very important for councils is our relationships
with, relevant local iwi in terms of our engagement and
consultation over issues,
it is possible that, treaty settlements
before the- these pieces of legislation are enacted
will be-- will rely on current provisions in terms
of, engaging and getting those
consultation obligations met. And, the
new legislation may mean that those previous treaty settlements
are now somewhat bereft or left behind.
So some attention given to how, treaty
settlements that have taken effect before,
these bills take effect once enacted, I think will
be appropriate and necessary. The next area I just wanna touch
on is the, heritage provisions.
So we've long been
keen to see some, more modern approaches to the
way, heritage,
properties or buildings, structures
are given protection. Um,
the planning bill will help by referring out to only significant historic
heritage being protected. Um, however, the
planning bill still says that councils must protect heritage
in, in Clause 11, even where there are other values such as
upgrading infrastructure and what have you, that might be more important.
So we, we do need some-- we would like to see some
clarity, in relation to that. We're also
keen to see that where private landowners make a decision
in relation to their herita-heritage
listing, structures, that is a
matter for them, and that council should be able to weigh up
public benefits and costs of heritage protection against these
other, important values, such as
development potential, good public spaces, safety and infrastructure costs.
Uh, and the, the next point in relation to regulatory relief, we just think there's
a contradiction in the, in the legislation
that, requires,
certain provisions, certain protections to be,
considered and in place and councils able to
regulate, for certain protections.
Um, but then, requires
effectively compensatory effects to follow.
The incentive there is for councils not to,
regulate for protection, but that would then invite those who wish to seek
protection to litigate, and indeed the Environment Court would have the power
to require the council to provide,
reg- regulatory protection where the council might not have done
so. And so we're in this kind of,
weird loop where the council completely loses control and is liable for paying
compensation for a decision that it might not wish to have made.
Um, that really needs to be, thought through, a little more
carefully. Those are the key high-level points,
I wanted to make. Happy to answer any questions from
members.
Thank you very much, Andrew and team.
Uh, look, we'll go first to one of your Wellington residents, Julie-Ann
Genter.
Kia ora koutou. Thank you so much. This is a really helpful
submission. Um, I just-- I particularly like the
suggestion around the registered activities being
separate to permitted activities.
I think that's a really useful suggestion, because we've certainly been
hearing that registering all permitted activities would be impact--
impractical, but there might be a reason to have some registered
activities. Um, I wondered,
the council says they're supportive of national direction
and, certainly that we understand
why. One of the concerns that has been raised by other submitters has been
the,
ministerial disre-discretion over that process of
nat-national direction, and I was just wondering if,
you would think it might be useful to have something like a board
of inquiry process for national direction,
just as councils are required to do for their plans, to
keep it from maybe, you know, to ensure there's more
transparent ways for the public to feed in and, a
more expert process to recommend national direction, so it's not just
this, in the ambit of the minister of the day.
Um, I think we're, we're assuming that, that, that process would
involve a, a level of consultation anyway.
I think, I, I, I would expect the courts would expect that to happen,
so that allows for a level of transparency, but also
engagement, as well as a degree of,
professional and objective input as well.
Um, so providing that,
that assumption is correct that, that there would be consultation and
engagement, then, we would be satisfied
with that.
Thank you. Um, look, I have a couple of questions.
Uh, regulatory relief, it comes up everywhere, in, in
different ways, and obviously all the councils have raised it
and, you know, some have... want to strike it fully out, and
others have provided solutions if the framework obviously
proceeds. And you, you have provided some solutions
here, in terms of how you think it could be, better
worked. Just wondering if you could just elaborate a little bit on that in
terms of, you know, how, how you think it could better work
for, for Wellington City Council.
Um, that's number 10 and 11,
on the points in your submission.
I might, I might-
So from a practical sense perhaps, you know, just so that we can get a little bit
more of an understanding, you know, where you're coming from, from Wellington
City Council's point of view.
Sure. I'll invite my colleague, Michael, to respond to the
question. Thanks.
Kia ora. Um, I think one of the, the key
issues that we've put forward in our submission, is that
the, the dynamic that's set up with the, the bill as it's been
proposed, is, is something that's been
driven largely by central government direction and, and perhaps what might
follow from national direction, and that imposition,
is, is on the council in terms of the impacts for
that. So, one of the suggestions that we've made is
that where it's, a, a requirement that's made from central
government, that, that imposition, of, of
compensatory impact is something that would then be met by the Crown rather
than, by the council itself. Um,
that, that's the main suggestion that we have on that front.
Okay. Thank you. Um, look, we'll loop back to,
Julieanne.
Only if no one else has questions. Um, I-
No, you, you go for it.
Yeah. Thank you. Um, I also thought the specific
recommendation, you have in paragraph 43
about adding a planning bill goal to lower national greenhouse gas emissions
through planning of land use transport infrastructure is really, really useful, and
I just wanted to know if you wanted to speak any more
to the practical reasons why the planning bill should
have a goal around, climate change mitigation
and or... as well as adaptation.
Um, yeah. I think there's no question, climate change
response is absolutely critical.
Um, you know, we're all suffering the effects of it on a regular basis, us and, and
everywhere else in the world. Um, when it comes to
planning, which is all about our, you know,
environmental, how we, h- how we
live within the environment, how we exploit the environment,
we need to have a clear signal that there is an expect- expectation that how
we,
plan for the future and build for the future is going to take into account climate
change implications, and with a clear view to
reduce, carbon emissions.
Yeah, and I think the other, the other point to add,
is the current spatial planning framework suggests that we should pay attention to
adaptation planning, and I find, when we review the
material of the bill, and it may just be an oversight, that, clearly having
a goal, nationally to lower our greenhouse gas
emissions is a good connection back into the spatial planning function, which of
course requires us to pay attention to adaptation planning.
So I think in that context it just stitches the...
you know, section 43 of our submission stitches that together in a more coherent
way.
Thank you. Look, I might just jump in with, one last quick question around
heritage, because, obviously very relevant to
Wellington. Um, the Wellington City Council had already submitted
previously, around the heritage changes.
Um, obviously you broadly support, this,
but you want clarity in relation to
heritage. Can you just explain a little further what you mean
by that and, and where you think that there would be a better solution when it
comes to heritage?
Yes. Well, then I'll start. Um, but the council feel quite strongly about this,
Madam Chair, and I, I suppose it stems from the fact that, you know, we
have s- been struggling with managing the, heritage
context of our city and the growth ambition of our city.
So, the, the submission is very clear that perhaps that
might be a, a matter best dealt with at a local level by
councils, in an opt-in, opt-out type, basis.
Um, we have just recently surveyed, for example,
all of our heritage building, building owners and, and,
structures, and owners of those, and it amounts to about two and a
half thousand, properties generally touched or owners
touched by the, that component, and we're hoping to understand,
how our community values heritage in that
context, those who have heritage, controls imposed
on them, and those who have willingly, gathered together as a community and
said, "We, we acknowledge the character of our area, and we'd like that character
protected." And you'll also see markets signaling often,
attracting towards particular character areas, the market actually,
placing value, in that, in that community asset of heritage.
So I think, it's a little bit of a, a plan done by us, then
done to us is probably the thrust of the submission.
Just if I was to elaborate-
Look, thank you. Did some, did you wanna make another point there?
Uh, yes, I just wanted to elaborate.
Um, just, I guess one of the challenges with the current system is that, we are
quite restricted by what the RMA, says we must do.
And if, if something's, you know, noticed significant, then it,
it creates quite a barrier to be able to, de-list heritage
buildings. So another challenge with the, the bill, as
it's currently drafted is that, we aren't clear about what level of
significance is. So just where that threshold is has quite a direct
impact on what the downstream effect is for building owners, but also
cities. So having some flexibility in the system at a local level
to, to trade off the, the heritage versus
other well-beings, would be quite helpful because it might
be that, they are significant.
But, compared perhaps with other elements, whether they be economic development
or climate change, those, you know, the
full sweep of issues need to be considered.
Look, thank you and, and thanks for that clarification.
Uh, look, really, really helpful, submission.
A really good submission, with, with lots of considerations and, and really
good feedback there. So appreciate all the time that you've spent on this
submission, and bringing this to us.
So thank you very much.
Thanks, Catherine. Thank you, committee.
So we now move to our next submitter,
Taranaki Energy Watch.
Just switch on audio. You're all right.
Um, sorry, end video.
Here we go. Uh, Sarah.
I'm here.
Yes.
Yeah, it's Sarah.
We can, see you and hear you. Welcome to the
select committee this afternoon.
Uh, look, you have 15 minutes with us, so, uh-
Right
... we'll hand it over to you to talk us through your submission, and then we'll
open up the questions.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to talk to you today around the
two bills. Um, just very briefly, Energy, Taranaki Energy Watch
is a long-standing grassroots community group based in, in
Taranaki, and we've participated in submissions
and hearings on district and regional plans, and obviously submitted to
national, communication around these things as
well. More specifically today, I just wanted to hone in for today's
context where we have contested the regional and district
plans with legal planning and risk experts, particularly in the
area of hazardous substances, and risk and consequence of
fatality and, and injury. And we've done this for more than a decade
now, so we're quite familiar with it.
And we have some concerns around,
the way that the bills are set out. Um,
it's actually quite a tricky situation because it is quite a complex
area, talking about hazardous substances and how you
might, look at how you legislate for them.
There isn't any standalone, work in oil and gas, say for
example, that was recommended by the parliamentary commissioner for the
environment, Jan Wright, back in the day, where there was a sort of standalone
set of legislation that went with it.
So it's hard to pick through what works and what doesn't work for
hazardous substances. So, I'd just like to note the
blueprint I mentioned in my first submission around how
many of the district plans that are contemporary now only address
hazardous substances and reverse, where reverse sensitivity effects, or
what I would call incompatible effects,
between two different sets of, say,
residential or hazardous facilities, and that they
may have a residual adverse effect.
I think that word residual is... un- underscores what it
really is. The resid- residual adverse effects that are left over
for land use planning are actually the things that, have the most
consequence. So they're the things like fatality and injury risk
and consequence. So these are the things that are called low probability, high
impact events, and this plan doesn't pick up on it.
These plans don't pick up on that part.
They do pick up on the lower level hazardous,
facility type approaches, and I'll go into that in a moment, but they really don't
look at those significant ones.
So if I can call this one, is- issue one...
Sorry, excuse me.
Issue one, um... Sorry, I've just had a colleague walk in, and I had booked
this room. Apologies. Fatality and injury risk
frequence- frequency and consequence.
New South Wales land use guidelines on hazardous instal-
installations are what is widely used in New Zealand.
We don't have our own guidelines to direct people,
authorities how to do this. And so at the moment, there is case
law in Taranaki, quite a bit of case law in Taranaki for this, but
there's also Wiri Terminal, Lyttelton Port, and the
Christchurch industrial area after the earthquakes where
this type of approach has been looked at in, in
looking at fatality and injury, and the potential for it, and
actually setting some guidelines and some rules, ob-
obviously in terms of plans, objectives, and rules around
it. Now, I'm happy to provide some examples of
maps. I can't show them on the screen today, but examples of maps and schedules
that are publicly available in Taranaki that show the issues
where
if you don't plan for it and don't have clear planning for it, you will end up with
residents and adjacent properties that are inside risk contours
for fatality and injury. And you'll also get residents and properties
that can be inside the consequence areas too because people don't know
about them. Unless they're put into some kind of
plan, people that go to Ulim, go to,
um-Uh, look at the website for
New Zealand Petroleum and Minerals.
Unless they go to look at those types of things, they're not going to pick it
up, and they're not gonna pick it up through a LIM unless it's in the plan.
And so they can't safeguard themselves either.
And in the case of the maps, for example, in New Plymouth and in South
Taranaki District, they're actually on planning maps, so you can see exactly
where the risk areas are or exactly where the consequences areas
are if they haven't had any planning, any QRAs done around them.
Now, the second issue is this is really specialized work.
Even as I'm talking, I can hear myself going deeper and deeper into all the
nuts and bolts of it. It's really very specialized work.
You need people that understand quantified risk.
You need, people that understand how you work out the consequences of
some of these hazardous installations.
We've spent more than a decade working with, with local government authorities on
this. This includes the regional council in Taranaki and the two,
three district councils, plus the oil industry, plus
other... Methanex, I can... Liquid Gas, all the people that sort
of are in Taranaki working on these, they've joined in with the plans.
So at the moment, currently on the maps in New Plymouth are Methanex, Todd
Energy's Mangahere production station, Liquid Gas, and a number
of well sites, and we're currently working on some others, as it's only the
proposed plan at the moment. We're still in environment court on
it. But the majority, you know, quite a few of them are already in the
plan. In South Taranaki, this covers the Kupe production station, the
Maari production station, and the Kapuni production station, and gas
treatment plants and the well sites, for the majority of the
sites. And each of these has these areas marked out
on maps. When you come to look at the plans,
it works both ways. It doesn't just... Sorry, I'll just step back.
It works both ways. It does- doesn't work with the,
facility itself. It also works with housing that comes too close or is
already too close, and the rules sh- show that they are not
allowed, it's not permitted to grow the footprint...
Sorry, I've... I just got another interruption.
I'm sorry, I'm bus- excuse me. Sorry, I'm busy.
Oh, it's all good. Go ahead.
Okay, sorry. Apologies. So there is,
um... Lost train of thought. So there's, this
ruling around 20% that needs to be, they
cannot add any more unless it's 20% of the home, so they can't grow the footprint
of their risk.
Now, the reason why we're so concerned about this is the wording.
So in the Planning Bill and the Natural Environment Bill, they have talk
around, if the activity includes the use of hazardous
installations, an assessment of the risks to the environment that
are likely to arise. Now, we're not talking about that type of
risk. That is not the residual. We are talking about the low
impa- low-probability, high-impact risk
that
might occur. So I have some suggested rewording of
those to Schedule 6 and Schedule 2
to remove the words "are likely to arise" and just leave them out
so that you say something like, "That could arise from such
use," and that will pick up both kinds of
risk. And then when you come to
Planning Bill Schedule 6, at DI,
sorry, D1, instead of saying, "Avoid,
minimize, or remedy where practicable," this shouldn't be
something that you should be looking at for,
fatality or injury risk.
Really, those types of, types of risk, particularly fatality, should be
avoided. And then with the lesser
risk, such as injury, minimized or remedied where
practicable. So it's a wording thing that, if picked up on, would
protect, people from fatality,
and obviously, minimize or remedy where
practicable for injury risk. And it's the same with the Natural Environment
Bill at the same numbers for Schedule 2.
So I think what I'm trying to say here is that it needs some eyes on
it that have expertise in looking at these types of things from
hazardous installations and making sure
that they're pr- that the people around them and the industry themselves are
protected.
Sorry. Thank you.
I should've put a sign on the door instead of putting it out on email.
I apologize.
No, appreciate we can have disruptions.
Look, thank you very much, Sarah, for, your submission.
Um,
it appears that we have, no f- further...
Oh, no, we do have a question, from, the Honorable Julie Anne
Genter.
Dora, Sarah, thanks very much for your submission.
Uh, it's, like, very, very clear. Um, I was gonna
ask you whether Taranaki Energy Watch had any
thoughts on whether climate change should be explicitly included in the goals of
the Planning Bill. It's been recommended by some other submitters,
including Wellington City Council, who we just heard from.
Um, if you don't have a view on this, that's fine.
I just thought, you might-
We, yeah, we d- we do have a view on it.
We, we have kept to the work that we do, obviously, in,
our, our ca- court cases. But we do have a view,
and we are very supportive of the ban on oil and gas, moving on to
renewable energy
in that respect. And so we do have a view that it should be included in the
Planning Bill
as well. Yeah. Thank you.
Look, thank you for that, Sarah, and thank you for your submission today,
and your advocacy in this area.
So, thank you very much.
Thank you.
So we now have our next submitter waiting, Te
Tupuna Ngā
Rāhu.And
we can see you there, Dion. Um, if you want to
perhaps pop on your camera.
Um, we can still see you, but--
see you there, but we can't
see your video on. There we go.
Are you there, Dion?
Uh, I am, yes. Can you hear me?
Oh, yes, I can hear you.
Oh.
Oh, there we go. We can, we can see you.
Kia ora again. Uh, welcome to the
select committee this afternoon.
Uh, look, take your submission as read.
I know it's a pretty, weighty submission, with a lot in it.
So if you just wanna take us through, the main points, and
then we'll open it up for questions.
Thank you. Yeah, yes, and I hope I'll have better luck than I did yesterday
with technology. But thank you, Chair.
Um, yeah, tenei, tenei au haumi e atu ki a koutou, e te
komiti, e te nei rangi. Um, so I'm Dion Luke.
I'm the, principal planner here for the Topeni Ngarahu Trust.
Uh, the Topeni Ngarahu is established under the deed of settlement for the
collective regis for Taranaki Maunga, and we
advocate, for the, the eight iwi of the
region. Uh, our settlement is complementary to
those original individual iwi settlements.
So we'll just start off, in a, in a broad overview.
Uh, so we did provide two written submissions, one on each of the planning and
natural environment bills. This submission will speak generally to cover
both those written submissions. Uh, at a high level, the two
bills create conflict by separating development and environmental
protection objectives. An explicit example of this is
arbitrary separation of land and the rest of the environment
in the planning bill.
The bills are full of this compartmentalization, which is
inconsistent with an integrated environmental management
approach. This is not accidental. This is deliberate.
Integrated environmental management is a sys-systematic approach to
environmental protection centered on unifying the diverse
aspects required for sustainable decision-making.
It is not about simply acknowledging different environmental components, but
actively considering their interrel-interrelatedness and
cumulative impacts on the holistic
environment. Uh, while integrated environmental
management approaches do not prevail or reject tikanga, it is
probably the closest Western systems come to aligning with tikanga.
The obv-obvious difference is that the economic and social systems do not
sit outside the environment in tikanga.
They are part of it and totally dependent on a healthy and
intergenerationally abundant environment.
The government has tried to sidestep the issue of the lack of integration by
compensating with volume. Two bills carrying over selected
parts of the RMA, also supplemented by introducing novel
concepts of regulatory relief and market-based
allocation. Amid the noise created by the bills, we
discern clear objectives to unilaterally reduce Māori
rights, ignore climate change impact, and dismiss the
well-being of future generations.
Some of the further objectives of the bills are an increase in ministerial power
at the, at the expense of local democratic
decision-making, the elevation of the status of private property
rights at the expense of public benefit, and prioritizing
development for development's sake over environmental
protection and enhancement. I'll move now to
clauses eight, nine and ten of both bills.
These clauses are pure symbolism based upon the Crown's new
interpretation of its obligations under the Treaty of Waitangi.
That interpretation reduces treaty rights as set out in treaty
settlements and by the
courts. This follows a recent trend to see
treaty settlements as being the only source of treaty obligations referenced in
legislation. Uh, our written
submissions intentionally focus on the lack of consultation in the development of
these bills. We have done so to, to draw attention to the poor
quality consultation we expect the minister will use on
proposed national instruments under clause eight and
on negotiating to uphold treaty settlements under clause
nine. This token commitment is demonstrated by
clause seven, subsection three A of the planning bill, schedule
one, where the process for consultation with iwi authorities on the
first national instruments is essentially
nullified. The fact that the select committee process is the
government's preferred consultation approach reflects poor practice
in policy development.
Treaty settlements were negot-negotiated to address the historic
exclusion of iwi and hapū from environmental
decision-making. Those settlements came with an acknowledgment
of that exclusion and an apology. The settlements are
full of whānui. We remind the select committee that an apology
without a change in behavior is simply
manipulation. Treaty settlements establish an
abiding pathway forwards towards
reconciliation. Justice is not temporary, nor is it
bound by time. For this reason, we acknowledge that the bills
willfully discriminate against those iwi who are yet to negotiate
treaty settlements.Uh,
turning now to identified Māori land.
There was quite a bit in our, our written submission around identified Māori land,
and we believe that, Te Taupini Kokorangi, the governance entity
for Te Kahui Tupua, presented earlier on
today. Uh, we acknowledge that the
identified Māori land classification is also in the-- was also in the
Natural and Built Environment Act and is also in the Fast Appro-Fast
Track Approvals Act. Um, our concerns are how
this inclusion in the bills impacts on the mana of Te Kahui Tupua.
While we understand the intention to provide better protection for identified Māori
land for activities like infrastructure development and
designations, the inclusion of Te Kahui Tupua,
Tupua has serious implications for governance mandates
established under treaty settlement.
These provisions have been negotiated to ensure that Te Taupini Ngaruhu can support
the aspirations of all eight iwi of Taranaki, both
within Te Papakura o Taranaki and in the wider
RMA environment. This is particularly relevant
to Section thirty-three of the RMA, where public authority includes in
the iwi authority and the statutory
authority. Clause two thirty-one of the
Natural Environment Act and Clause one ninety-three of the planning
bill removes iwi authorities and statutory authorities from an
equivalent council powers section.
This essentially voids the purposes of negotiating these provisions
in the se- in our settlement, while also undermining the governance
mandate of Te Taupini Kokorangi in regard to Te Kahui
Tupua.
Uh, just on now to regulatory relief.
Uh, the introduction of an expanded regulatory relief concept is
questionable given that private property rights are a social
institution which confers both rights and
obligations. While we cautiously support building upon
existing RMA Section eighty-five, it needs to be clear what
is considered overregulation.
Currently, currently the bills neither define nor limit the scope
of regulatory
relief. Uh, we
expect sites of significance and biodiversity areas to be
excluded from a potential regulatory relief
regime. Um, in conclusion, along with many other
submitters, we have called upon government, regardless of their place
on the political spectrum, to work with opposition parties
to ensure our policy development translates
into statute which is durable and
sustainable, sustainable across electoral and
economic cycles.
Reform of the RMA takes courage and humility.
Courage requires genuine, meaningful consultation with iwi,
hapū and community. Humility requires a government to
take on board the advice and evidence provided by experts
both within and with-- and outside the public service.
The bills are indeed a framework. However, however, they are a framework
set on the foundations of ignorance,
organized irresponsibility and short-term
thinking. Compressed time frames are no excuse for
poor legislative design and a lack of due
diligence. For re-reforms as significant as
these, we demand and expect better.
There should be no doubt from our written submissions and countless others that
nothing short of the existing Part Two RMA provisions
or better is acceptable. We ask the select
committee to reject the bills in their current form and direct the government
to undertake the consultation it should have in the first place.
Members of the committee, that is all I have for today.
Happy to answer any questions.
Look, thank you very much, Dion, for that very thorough
submission. Uh, look, we'll take our first question from
Huhana.
Thank you Dion and, .
Really
keen to understand from now with your technical
perspective, we discussed earlier this morning
about how the legislation and the settlement has provided
like a , or that, a foundation, a korowai,
something to support the wider health and wellbeing of both the
environment, the people, supported by the kaitiakitanga of the
iwi. Uh, what are the ways by which you could
tangibly see improvements on what we
have right now?
And I know this is a tricky one because, you know, there's, there's fundamental
issues here. But what could we do now
at this stage to improve it, for your people, for
your place, and for the taiao in your community?
Well, adequate consultation would be a good start. Yeah.
I'll just, just put that one in there.
But, yeah, there's obviously processes need to have meaningful
consultation to be sustainable and long term.
Yeah.
Yeah. That's been, Madam Chair.
Um, that's been an ongoing, voice of concern
is that, how poor iwi have been treated
like Joe Public, and you're kind of coming into this process
instead of being a part of the development and
contributing and your recommendations being taken on board at the drafting
stage.
Yeah. Yeah. Yes. Yes, indeed. You know what I mean?
Iwi and hapū aren't opposed to change.
They, they see the, the benefits of, replacing the RMA, but it needs to
be, yeah, really consistent with their
views.
Look, thank you, Dion. And thanks for all the work that you've done on
these submissions and obviously your previous submission as well.
Um, I really appreciate, your time, and the technology did, work a
lot better today, so woo-hoo. No,
thank you.
Kia ora.
So now we welcome through the New Plymouth
District Council, Mayor
Max.
We are coming.
We can hear you, Max. We just can't see you.
How good is that, eh? I'm like the invisible
submitter.
Yeah, at the, at the moment.
Have you got us now?
No, we still can't see you.
Oh, we're having... But-
We, um... Oh, there we go. We can see you, Max.
Welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
You are our lucky last submitter, so, we'll hand it over
to you. But look, take, the submission as read, and,
we'll hand over you to talk through the main points and then open up the questions.
Right. So I'm gonna cheat a little bit.
I've got Rochelle Macbeth here, who is our lead on planning.
She's the technical expert. She'll cover all the gaps in my knowledge.
Um, first of all, I'd just like to acknowledge, the committee
for sitting through submissions.
As someone who does that locally, I take my hat off to you,
and I thank you for the work that you put into doing what you
do. Um, so for a start, my name is Max Brough for those that
haven't had the misfortune pleasure of meeting me yet. Hello, Cameron.
How are you doing today? And David, nice to see you.
Um, and Mr. Webb, thank you. And
Ms. Linden, is it? Thank you for having us. Think I've got everyone.
Oh, and there I am under my little notepad.
Uh, so I'd just like to say that New Plymouth District Council supports and
welcomes the long overdue re- resource management
reform. And our goal is simple, really.
A planning system that would work for our district, supports our people, and
enables good projects to get moving probably at a little bit more pace
than they have historically. Uh, so we're looking forward to this.
Uh, I'd just like to say that, while I've got the moment, that New, New Plymouth
and by extension the whole country is in a pretty tough economic space.
Um, we're suffering here from some decisions to shutter the oil and gas
exploration, and it's hitting us quite hard.
Uh, the flow on
with energy resili- resilience across New Zealand is, impacting the economy
nationally as well. So for us, it's pretty, pretty key.
This is a pretty key part of where you're, where you're looking to help us get
to. Um, and we believe the new system has got the real potential to
help turn that corner, get around that point.
Uh, we're looking for the reform to assist us to actively attract new invest-
investment and strengthen our economy locally.
And by extension, that will flow through the rest of the country if we can get some
of that stuff moving again. Um, I guess our biggest concern
is around the cost to council, given, and especially given every other
process that's going on with, with the concurrent reforms across our
sector. Um, I also understand that how these tie
together, and they're interlocking blocks that need addressing almost
simultaneously. Um, because without doing one, the others
don't really have the same effect that you would hope they would have.
So i- it's a big piece of work. Um, the timelines are
tight. Uh, and, and not just our council, but all
councils across the country, they're really gonna struggle with, with cost and,
and maybe getting some cost neutrality in this.
So for us, that's fairly key. Um, I'd just like to note, you may
not have heard this, but it's possibly difficult to
deliver everything within a rates cap environment.
Uh,
and just for your reference, we've already successfully embarked on
this process this year coming. We've, we've halved our
projected increases. So that probably, we might have got a little bit ahead of that
too fast maybe to our detriment. Um, but I'd just like to ask the
committee to maybe consider how, how some sort of
financial relief will, would, would, would be welcomed and received all...
not just here, but all around the country.
Um, so I guess that's part of what you have to think through.
Uh, I, I don't have all the answers.
I might like to think I've got one or two that we could contribute maybe down the
end of this session. Um, but look, we've, we've got
a team here that have identified some difficulties to navigate through, and I'm
gonna ask Rochelle, with your, leave, to speak to some of that stuff if I
may, please.
Thank you. Good afternoon. So I just wish to highlight, some of the points made
in our submission. Um, some of the points I wish to emphasize are around plan
making, growth planning, regulatory relief, Māori
interests, amenity, e-planning, and the system
change. So NPDC was the first council to publicly
notify a proposed district plan under the national planning standards.
We notified our second generation plan in 2019, and eight years later
we have a part operative district plan with just a handful of site-specific
environment
The EAG report talked about, the role of structure planning and
considered a Schedule 1, plan change process may not be required to
rezone new development areas. So we are quite comfortable with this approach
if it's done right. Um, we understand the future provisions clauses of
the planning bill are intended to support that agile release of land,
but there's no mention of structure planning, and there's not sufficient detail
to understand what's, the proposal is for land
release. So we have some examples in the district of suboptimal
consenting experiences and suboptimal environmental
outcomes which could have been avoided with robust structure planning,
and conversely we have got examples of value
add from taking a collaborative holistic design-led approach through
spatial planning, structure planning, and master planning.
So we would encourage the government to prioritize, national
direction and a standardized approach for land
release. The reforms provide an opportunity to increase
flexibility and growth, but with infrastructure and other
development costs being so expensive, we need to set clear expectations to
increase investor confidence, especially for those people undertaking out
of sequence development. Um, I
understand you've heard a lot about regulatory relief, and NPDC does share the
concerns other councils have raised about the proposed regulatory relief
system. So, we understand that the government's intent is to
prevent ad hoc or inconsistent restrictions on
landowners. Just wanted to give you a bit of a local context there.
With our district plan, we have over twenty thousand hectares of significant
natural areas, or SNAs, identified and protected,
and, the council recognizes the ecosystem services these
landowners provide through a palette of measures, including rating relief, reduced
consent fees, incentive lot subdivision, funding for active
management such as fencing off from stock, and landowner
liaison. And in our plan development, all SNA
landowners were engaged with, were offered ground truthing.
A really robust, evidence-based process was
undertaken. Um, we accept SN-
SNA shifting to regional councils, but note that both TRC and
NPDC will face transition costs. We've got quite a package there
to, manage going forward. Also on the
regulatory relief, sites and areas of significance to Māori or SASIM.
I believe our district plan has the highest number scheduled in the country, over
one thousand SASIMs, and most of them are also archaeological
sites. So our historic and cultural landscape,
reflects decades of land wars and land confiscation.
There is very little Māori land in the district, only point four
percent, so SASIMs are a key mechanism for those,
Tangata Whenua ancestral
connections. Uh, a- and as with
identifying SNAs in the district plan review, for SASIM all landowners were
engaged with. The council worked with contract archaeologists over many years to
map the extents of these sites to build that evidence base, and, and one of the
key drivers was to increase certainty for landowners so that they,
yeah, about the location and values of these sites.
Um, with such a high number of SASIM in our district plan, we grant a
number of consents under the rules, and there is a consent pathway.
Consents are virtually always granted.
Um, from our perspective, there are already tools available and used by
councils to recognize the impact of overlays and district plan restrictions on
private land. Um,
w- in my view, regulatory relief is not required, and, and it is actually very
problematic for us. And in particular,
retrospective regulatory relief seems unreasonable considering the thorough and
c- costly process we've been, we've gone through over at least a decade
to get our SASIMs and SNAs through.
Um, just like to m- move on now. Māori interests.
So for Māori interests more generally, our submission considers the bill's,
place an over-reliance on identified Māori land.
In our district, that's a significant and disproportional impact on Tangata
Whenua, with most land, ancestral land being
alienated through confiscation.
The bills also over rely on treaty settlements, which were
negotiated in good faith in reliance of the rights afforded by RMA Part
2, such as Kaitiakitanga.
And we have developed some excellent relationships with Tangata
Whenua from working together under the current RMA, and we are concerned
about these narrowed, recognition of interests that, that could
impact these relationships. So our submission requests the bills reinstate
provision RMA
C7A and 8, strengthen
participation and consents, and provide for the recognition of
Kaitiakitanga and broader cultural values.
And for reform to be durable and legitimate,
we think that we must respect the Treaty of Waitangi and Māori rights and
interests. Uh, another
issue we want to, raise is amenity.
So we understand the government's intention to protect private property
rights, but removing amenity,
from the scope of effects able to be considered, fails to
recognize that what you do on your-- while you're enjoying your property may
detract from your neighbor's enjoyment of their property.
So a, a blanket direction to disregard visual amenity would undermine
our ability to, to deliver well-functioning
environments, which are goals in the new system, and, you
know, we've got a distinctive, character in our district,
and, that, people care about that.
Uh, assuming the zone chapters will have bulk and location controls such as
height limit for triggering consents, it's, it's difficult to understand how
breaches of bulk and location permitted standards would be assessed if
amenity is not a relevant
consideration. Um, and
so our submission suggests instead of removing amenity as an effect able to
be considered under the planning bill, that the potential for council
overreach could be addressed instead through standardized zone chapters that, that
would be pr-prepared by central government.And again, the
success of this would depend on timely and well-developed national direction and
standardized chapters. And, we, we just hope that,
you know, do, do support the intent of a more permissive environment, but just
hope that they're not so permissive as to unduly erode neighborhood
quality. Um, just move on now
to about the transition. So, overall, you've heard from other councils
as well, we, we need some realistic time frames.
So while the council wants to get moving with implementing the new system, and
alongside our regional peers, we have, begun this in earnest with
the regional spatial plan already being worked on.
Um, we need enough time to meaningful enga- meaningfully engage with the
community and mana whenua to, um ...
The current timelines for spa- the spatial plan is, are particularly
tight. Um, so you know what they are.
Um,
so, in, in the Taranaki Regional Council
presentation, select committee explored the concept of the first regional spatial
plan being an interim one, which would need to be looked back on
after the land use plans and the natural environment plans are delivered.
So MPDC are aligned with TRC that this is a realistic
scenario given the delivery time frames, because what can be delivered in that
first plan, you know, will be, will be limited.
And they sort of feed back on each other.
Um, and yet to stress that timely provision of updated,
national planning standards will be key.
And we also recommend that government should provide councils with a digital
platform, that, that can be used
consistently across the country for combined plans.
So we invested a lot in creating our new district plan.
There are limited e-planning experts in the country to support the work, and
there's a lot of work in the back end to build and test the
e-plan.
Um, and just, final comment on, the rates
capping. The rates capping does risk the success of the resource
management system and, the local government and emergency
management reform, and so, perhaps the
implementation costs could be under a different kind of funding model
as, Mayor Max
hinted at at the start. But thank you for the opportunity to speak,
and I'm happy to take any questions.
Look, thank you very much. Um, you've covered a lot of, areas
there, similar to other councils across the country as well.
Uh, look, we'll go to Cameron Luxton for a question.
Well, thank you, Chair. Uh, and thank you very much for being our last submitter of
the day, and Mayor Max, bringing that, energy that you have, that you're known
for, so appreciate that. Um, the question that I have is-
We are the energy province. You know that, right?
Yeah, that's right. That's right. And long may that continue.
So, the question, I have is about, you know,
your current... Your experience with NPSs and
NESs, that come out of Wellington, so far in our
existing planning system. What do you, want to
see to make sure that, NPDs and national standards in the new
system, that are designed in Wellington and, and brought out,
are workable for local councils?
Yeah, we, we really need to, be involved in the testing, in the drafting and
the testing, and obviously a decent consultation period when they're being, being
released. Um, but I guess just
that please, just something that is not going to flip-flop
dramatically so that we have... The, the planning processes take time to
work through, and when you're partway through it and then you have to flip-flop
into a completely different approach, it's really expensive and timely
and just confuses, it bamboozles everybody, and it
makes participation in the process difficult.
So just real, like, clear and enduring
guidance-
Yeah
... direction. That, that's a very non-specific answer, right?
But it's, it's quite key, isn't it, really?
Yeah. So-
Like-
Yeah, Car- go, Cameron.
Well, it's just bipartisan support, I guess, is difficult to achieve in this,
'cause everybody... But we're all trying to get to the same place, so I guess what
we're asking for is could we, could we get some middle ground?
Because that'd be nice to, to have through the process,
as much as possible.
What sort of... If I may, Chair. What, what sort of-
Yes, yes.
Um, you know, bi- bi- bipartism's a hopeful, a
hopeful thing and, and, but, you know, the,
politics, people do disagree, and we've gotta find a way in a democracy to, to work
it through. Have you, have, have you put any,
thought into potential ways of making
it, making changes more lasting, so we don't have a completely
rigid planning system, but also one that swings every time a minister
changes? Have you got any thoughts in that area you could share with the committee?
I'm sure our technical people have had some ideas.
I, I think the way that, I understand it, it's going to be packaged up.
The national direction's gonna be packaged up, so hopefully that indicates that
one piece of national direction isn't gonna be developed kind of,
sort of in isolation away from the rest of the package. So when you've...
You know, the, the, the difficulty is where you've got things like, a
really strong avoid policies, evolving case law, and then you've
got enabling policies and, in, in other national direction, and
they are difficult to reconcile. So just being
really,
checking that when you tinker one bit, you're not
creating a whole other li- litigation because they're not speaking to each
other. Well, I'd probably just narrow that
to some stuff that's come to my attention. Um, there's...
And, and R- Rah touched on SATMS. There's a big,
big, thing that we have to go through as a district.
And one of the things that I've found here is
it, it's apparent in Taranaki, probably more so than anywhere else, that these have
a big effect on, on property, and property owners.
And actually it's not just the property that it might be on.
It, it's quite often the adjoining properties as well.
Um, so going backwards and forwards on that, it would be good if we could get
a, a mechanism that works for the whole country that's fair, and that, and
that's probably something that we've, we've been at the forefront of in Taranaki in
recent times, is navigating our way through that.
We've got a, we've got it all identified and, and it
has a flow on effect to surrounding properties as well, and I'm not sure
that... I haven't been over the detail of what they're proposing, but sorry,
but,
it's, it has an effect on the neighbors.
Um- I, I do think the standardization-
Yeah
... will help address that, so.
Yeah. Thank you.
Look, thank you very much, for your submission. We've met time.
We've gone well over time, actually. Uh, but lots in your submission.
We appreciate all your work on it. Um, and you know, lots of considerations
there and feedback. So thank you for that.
Thank you.
So members, that brings us to the end of our public session
today. Uh, we are going to resume in private
session at 4:00 PM, with the other subcommittee.
So, if you go into the private link, it'll bring
us all back together at
4:00.